 CHAPTER  1
 Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder 
K aren Rusa was a 30-year-old married woman and the mother of four children. Although she had been having anxiety-related problems for a number of years, she had never sought professional help prior to this time. During the preceding 3 months, she had become increasingly depressed; her family physician fi nally suggested that she seek psychological services. 
     For the past several months, Karen had been experiencing intrusive, repetitive thoughts that centered on her children’s safety. She frequently found herself imagining that a serious accident had occurred, and she was unable to put these thoughts out of her mind. On one such occasion, she imagined that her son, Alan, had broken his leg playing football at school. There was no reason to believe that an accident had occurred, but Karen brooded about the possibility until she fi nally called the school to see if Alan was all right. Even after receiving reassurance that he had not been hurt, she was somewhat surprised when he later arrived home unharmed. 
    K aren also noted that her daily routine was seriously hampered by an extensive series of counting rituals that she performed throughout each day. Specifi c numbers had come to have a special meaning to Karen; she found that her preoccupation with these numbers was interfering with her ability to perform everyday activities. One example was grocery shopping. Karen believed that if she selected the fi rst item (e.g., a box of cereal) on the shelf, something terrible would happen to her oldest child. If she selected the second item, some unknown disaster would befall her second child, and so on for the four children. The children’s ages were also important. The sixth item in a row, for example, was associated with her youngest child, who was 6 years old. Thus, specifi c items had to be avoided to ensure the safety of her children. Obviously, the rituals required continuing attention because the children’s ages changed. Karen’s preoccupation with numbers extended to other activities, most notably the pattern in which she smoked cigarettes and drank coffee. If she had one cigarette, she believed that she had to smoke at least four in a row or one of the children would be harmed in some way. If she drank one cup of coffee, she felt compelled to drink four. 
1
    K aren acknowledged the irrationality of these rituals but, nevertheless, maintained that she felt much more comfortable when she observed them conscientiously. When she was occasionally in too great a hurry to perform the rituals, she experienced considerable anxiety in the form of a subjective feeling of dread and apprehension. She described herself as tense, jumpy, and unable to relax during these periods. Her fears were most often confi rmed because something unfortunate invariably happened to one of the children within a few days after each such “failure.” The fact that minor accidents are likely to occur at a fairly high rate in any family of four children did not diminish Karen’s conviction that she had been directly responsible because of her inability to observe the numerical rules. 
    I n addition to her obsessive ideas and compulsive behaviors, Karen reported dissatisfaction with her marriage and problems in managing her children. Her husband, Tony, had been placed on complete physical disability 11 months prior to her fi rst visit to the mental health center. Although he was only 32 years old, Tony suffered from a serious heart condition that made even the most routine physical exertion potentially dangerous. Since leaving his job as a clerk at a plumbing supply store, he had spent most of his time at home. He enjoyed lying on the couch watching television and did so for most of his waking hours. He had convinced Karen that she should be responsible for all the household chores and family errands. Her days were spent getting the children dressed, fed, and transported to school; cleaning; washing; shopping; and fetching potato chips, dip, and beer whenever Tony needed a snack. The inequity of this situation was apparent to Karen and was extremely frustrating, yet she found herself unable to handle it effectively. 
     The children were also clearly out of her control. Robert, age 6, and Alan, age 8, were very active and mischievous. Neither responded well to parental discipline, which was inconsistent at best. Both experienced behavioral problems at school, and Alan was being considered for placement in a special classroom for particularly disruptive children. The girls were also diffi cult to handle. Denise, age 9, and Jennifer, age 11, spent much of their time at home arguing with each other. Jennifer was moderately obese. Denise teased her mercilessly about her weight. After they had quarreled for some time, Jennifer would appeal tearfully to Karen, who would attempt to intervene on her behalf. Karen was becoming increasingly distressed by her inability to handle this confusing situation, and she was getting little, if any, help from Tony. During the past several weeks, she had been spending more and more time crying and hiding alone in her bedroom. 
 Social History 

 Karen was raised in New York City by Italian immigrant parents. She was the fi rst of four children. Her family was deeply religious, and she was raised to be a devout Roman Catholic. She attended parochial schools from the fi rst grade through high school and was a reasonably good student. Her memories of the strict practices of the church and school authorities were vivid. The formal rituals of the church played an important role in her life, as they did for the other members of her family. Beginning at an early age, Karen was taught that she had to observe many specifi c guidelines that governed social behavior within the church (not eating meat on Fridays, going to confession regularly, and so forth). She was told that her strict adherence to these norms would ensure the safety of her immortal soul, and conversely, that transgressions would be severely punished. 
     The depth of her belief and the severity of its consequences can be seen in the following story, which Karen recalled during an early session. When she was 8 years old, Karen and her classmates at school were to receive their First Communion in the church. This is a particularly important and solemn occasion for Roman Catholics that signifi es the child’s advancement to adult status in the church community. Before the child is allowed to partake in communion, however, a complete confession must be made of all prior sins. Karen was told that she was to confess all her sins, regardless of their severity or the time of their occurrence, to her priest, who would prescribe an appropriate penance. She remembered her parents’ and teachers’ warnings that if she failed to mention any of her sins, her soul would be banished to hell for eternity. This threat was still vivid in Karen’s mind many years later. Despite the terror aroused by these circumstances, Karen intentionally failed to tell the priest about one of her sins; she had stolen a small picture book from her classroom and was now afraid either to return it or to tell anyone about the crime. She lived with intense guilt about this omission for several years and could remember having occasionally terrifying nightmares that centered on imagined punishments for not providing a complete confession. In subsequent years, Karen intensifi ed her efforts to abide by even the minutest details of church regulations, but she continued to harbor the conviction that she could never atone for this mortal sin. 
     Karen remembered her parents as having been very strict disciplinarians. Her mother was apparently a rather unemotional and rigid person who had insisted on the maintenance of order and cleanliness in their household. Beyond her unerring adherence to religious rules and regulations, Karen’s mother kept the family on a tight schedule with regard to meals and other routine activities. When the children deviated from these guidelines, they were severely punished. Karen’s most positive recollections of interaction with her mother centered on their mutual participation in prescribed church functions. She did not remember her parents ever demonstrating affection for each other in front of their children. 
    K aren married Tony after she graduated from high school, and she became pregnant two months later. During this pregnancy, she witnessed an unfortunate accident at her neighbor’s apartment. While Karen was chatting with her friend, the woman’s infant daughter crawled off the porch and was run over by another child riding a bicycle. The girl was seriously injured and remained in the hospital for several weeks. Shortly after this accident, Karen began experiencing repetitive, intrusive thoughts about injuring herself. At unpredictable but frequent intervals throughout the day, she would fi nd herself thinking about jumping out of windows, walking in front of cars, and other similar dangerous behaviors. These thoughts were, of course, frightening to her, but she could not prevent their occurrence. When one of the thoughts did come into her mind, she attempted to get rid of it by quickly repeating a short prayer that she had learned as a child and then asking God for forgiveness for having entertained such a sinful impulse. This procedure was moderately successful as a temporary source of distraction, but it did not prevent the reappearance of a similar, intrusive thought several hours later. These thoughts of self-injury occurred less frequently and seemed less troublesome after the birth of her fi rst child, Jennifer, perhaps because Karen was soon preoccupied with all the responsibilities of caring for the baby. 
     During this same time, Karen began to be disillusioned with the church. Her distress centered on a number of reforms that had been introduced by Pope John XXIII and the ecumenical council. The Mass, for example, was no longer said in Latin, and nonclerical persons were allowed to administer various rites of the church. Similarly, church members were no longer admonished to give up meat on Fridays, and other rituals were modifi ed or completely eliminated. Most people found these changes refreshing, but Karen was horrifi ed. The church’s rituals had come to play a central role in her life. In de-emphasizing the importance of traditional rituals, the church was depriving Karen of her principal means of controlling her own destiny. She was extremely uncomfortable with these new practices and eventually stopped going to church altogether. 
    W hen Jennifer was 9 months old, Karen once again became pregnant. She and Tony decided to move to the suburbs, where they would be able to afford a house with a yard in which the children could play. Although she was proud of their new home, Karen began to feel depressed during this period because she missed her old friends. 
     Karen’s situation showed little change throughout the next few years. By the time she was 25 years old, she had four children. She found this responsibility overwhelming and was generally unhappy most of the time. Her relationship with Tony had essentially reached a stalemate; they were not satisfi ed with their marriage, but they agreed to stay together for the children. Although they did not fi ght with each other openly, a sense of covert tension and estrangement pervaded their relationship. Tony refused to participate in what he considered unnecessarily rigid and complicated household regulations, particularly those dealing with the children’s behavior. Karen had established very specifi c guidelines for meals, bedtime, and so on but found that she was unable to enforce these rules by herself. She remained distant from Tony and resisted most of his attempts to display physical affection. Thus, overall, Karen was chronically unhappy and generally dissatisfi ed with her life, but she nevertheless clung to her miserable surroundings and established patterns of behavior out of fear that any change would be for the worse. 
    T his unhappy, yet tolerable, equilibrium was disturbed by Tony’s deteriorating health. One day, while he was working at the store, he experienced sudden chest pains and numbness in his extremities. Recognizing these symptoms as serious in nature (he had had high blood pressure for years and was therefore well informed in this regard), Tony asked a friend to drive him to the hospital. His experience was diagnosed as a mild heart attack. Further testing revealed serious structural abnormalities in his heart. He was eventually discharged from the hospital, given a complete medical disability, and laid off from his job. 
    K aren became more and more depressed after Tony began staying home during the day. It was during this time that her fears about the children’s safety became clearly unreasonable, and she started performing her counting rituals. Karen realized that her situation was desperate because she felt that she had lost control of her own behavior and experienced considerable anxiety whenever she attempted to resist performing the rituals. At this point, she fi nally decided to seek professional help. 
 Conceptualization and Treatment 

T he therapist saw the ritualistic behavior as one part of Karen’s overall diffi cult situation. Karen’s counting compulsion represented her attempt to reintroduce a sense of personal control over her own life. In this sense, the rituals were being performed instead of either the more socially acceptable religious activities that she had employed as a child or the more effective social skills that she had apparently never developed. For example, she was unassertive in her relationship with Tony. Instead of standing up for her rights, she would meekly acquiesce to even his most unreasonable demands. At the same time, she would become extremely frustrated and angry with him and would look for subtle ways to “even the score.” She was similarly unable to convey her appreciation to him on those (admittedly rare) occasions when he did please her. Treatment was therefore initially aimed at the development of interpersonal skills that would give Karen more control over her environment. It was hoped that as she was able to create a more satisfactory relationship with her husband and children, her increased competence would eliminate the necessity of turning to admittedly superstitious, ineffective attempts to achieve self-control. 
    K aren quickly recognized her defi ciency in this regard but was unable to change her behavior spontaneously. She and the therapist therefore agreed to pursue a systematic program of assertion training. The initial sessions in this sequence were devoted to a careful assessment of the situations in which Karen was unassertive. She was asked to keep a daily notebook of such situations in which she noted the people involved, the nature of their interaction, and her perception of the situation, including what she thought would happen if she did behave assertively. Having identifi ed typical problem situations, Karen and her therapist role-played several incidents as a way of introducing Karen to more appropriate responses. They also discussed Karen’s irrational fears associated with assertion. These thoughts centered on her implicit belief that everyone should love her, and that if she stood up for her own rights, people would reject her. These irrational self-statements were inhibiting the expression of assertive behaviors. After Karen became profi cient with such exercises in the therapy sessions, she was asked to start practicing her new skills in real-life situations outside the clinic. 
    A fter assertion training had produced some positive results, the therapist began teaching Karen more effective child-management skills. These were based primarily on procedures associated with instrumental learning (also known as operant conditioning). She was taught, for example, to ignore her daughters when they were quarreling and to reinforce them positively for playing together appropriately. Her efforts were initially channeled toward behaviors that could be changed easily. The most diffi cult problems, such as getting the children to stop fi ghting at mealtimes, were left until Karen had mastered some of the general principles of child management. 
    I n addition to these skill-training programs, the therapist also discussed Karen’s concerns about religion. It was clear that the church was still important to her and that she experienced considerable guilt and anxiety over her failure to attend services regularly. The fact that her children were not involved in church activities was also troubling to Karen. She worried that if any harm came to one of them, God would not protect them. For these reasons, Karen was encouraged to visit several priests at churches in her area in an effort to fi nd one who was more conservative and thus more compatible with her own views. Although most of the local priests had moved toward contemporary practices in their own churches, they did refer her to an older priest at a church somewhat farther from her neighborhood, who still adhered to several of the traditional rituals she had learned as a child. She made an appointment to visit this priest and was both pleased and relieved after their initial meeting. He was able to discuss with her some of the changes that had been made in the church. In some cases, he was able to explain the rationale behind a particular change in a way that was acceptable to her. This process was, no doubt, facilitated by the fact that he shared many of her concerns about abandoning traditional practices. Karen felt much more comfortable with this priest than she did with the liberal priest who was in charge of the church in her immediate neighborhood. Within weeks, she was once again attending church regularly with her four children. 
    T he combination of assertion training, parent education, and a renewed interest in church activities did lead to an important improvement in Karen’s mood. After 3 months of treatment, she reported an increased sense of selfconfi dence and an improvement in her family life. There was also some reduction in her anxiety level. She continued to observe her number rituals, but they were somewhat less frequent, and when she did fail to perform the counting routines, she was not as distraught as she had been at the beginning of treatment. 
    A t this point, Karen’s rituals were addressed directly using a behavioral treatment method known as exposure and response prevention (ERP) (Tolin & Steketee, 2007). This procedure involves purposely exposing the person to stimuli that provoke intense anxiety (either in imagination or in reality) for extended periods of time while preventing the person from performing anxiety-reducing rituals. Karen was asked to smoke a single cigarette at the beginning of a therapy session. When she was fi nished with the cigarette, she began to feel anxious and worry about her oldest daughter. She was then instructed to resist the temptation to smoke another cigarette. Thus, the response that she typically employed to neutralize her anxiety and to control the ruminations was prevented. The therapist believed that this type of prolonged exposure to the anxiety-provoking situation would lead to a reduction in Karen’s anxiety. The procedure was carried out during four consecutive 2-hour sessions. Karen was encouraged to practice the same response-prevention procedure on her own between sessions. When she had mastered the cigarette-smoking problem, the procedure was extended progressively to other similar situations in which she had been concerned about numbers. 
     Treatment was terminated after 20 sessions. Karen was no longer depressed and had not engaged in her compulsive counting rituals for 4 weeks. The children were better behaved at home, and Karen had plans to institute further changes in this regard. Her relationship with Tony was somewhat improved. Although he had become quite upset initially when Karen began to assert herself, he became more cooperative when he saw an improvement in her adjustment. 
 Discussion 

O bsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is included in the  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders ( DSM-IV-TR ; APA, 2000, pp. 462–463) under the general heading of Anxiety Disorders. It is defi ned by the following criteria:
1. Either obsessions or compulsions:
 Obsessions as defi ned by (a), (b), (c), and (d):
a. R ecurrent and persistent thoughts, impulses, or images that are experienced, at some time during the disturbance, as intrusive and inappropriate, and that cause marked anxiety or distress. 
b. T he thoughts, impulses, or images are not simply excessive worries about real-life problems. 
c. The person attempts to ignore or suppress such thoughts, impulses, or images, or to neutralize them with some other thought or action. 
d. T he person recognizes that the obsessional thoughts, impulses, or images are a product of his or her own mind. 
 Compulsions as defi ned by (a) and (b):
a. The person feels driven to perform repetitive behaviors (e.g., hand washing, ordering, checking) or mental acts (e.g., praying, counting, repeating words silently) in response to an obsession, or according to rules that must be applied rigidly. 
b. T he behaviors or mental acts are aimed at preventing or reducing distress or preventing some dreaded event or situation; however, these behaviors or mental acts either are not connected in a realistic way with what they are designed to neutralize or prevent, or are clearly excessive. 
2. At some point during the course of the disorder, the person has recognized that the obsessions or compulsions are excessive or unreasonable. 
3. T he obsessions or compulsions cause marked distress, are time consuming (take more than 1 hour a day), or signifi cantly interfere with the person’s normal routine, occupational (or academic) functioning, or usual social activities or relationships. 
    T he most common types of obsessions have been described by Rasmussen and Eisen (1992), who recorded the frequency of specifi c symptoms in a sample of more than 500 patients. The numbers in parentheses indicate the percentage of patients who exhibited each type of obsession. Most of the patients (72%) had multiple obsessions.
Fear of contamination 	 (50%): A fear of exposure to stimuli such as dirt, germs, poison, or radiation. The person’s concern may include fear that other people, as well as themselves, will become ill. Fear of contamination is most often coupled with compulsive hand washing. 
Pathological doubt  (42%): An inclination to worry that something bad is going to happen because a task has not been completed correctly. People with this symptom often develop counting rituals that may include a complex system of good numbers and bad numbers. They may repeat certain actions a particular magical number of times (as in Karen’s case). 
Somatic obsessions  (33%): The irrational, persistent fear of developing a serious life-threatening illness (often indistinguishable from hypochondriasis, i.e., fear of having some disease despite reassurance from a physician that the disease is not present). 
Need for symmetry  (32%): An extreme need to have objects or events in a certain order or position, to do and undo certain motor actions in an exact fashion, or to have things exactly symmetric or “evened up.” 
Aggressive obsessions  (31%): Recurrent, ghastly thoughts or images that the person has committed a violent or an inappropriately aggressive act. 
Sexual obsessions  (24%): Repeated, distressing thoughts about, or impulses to perform, inappropriate sexual behaviors. 
    I n addition to provoking anxiety, sexual and aggressive obsessions are associated with exaggerated feelings of shame and guilt. People with this symptom may seek constant reassurance from friends (or therapists) that they are not really capable of performing such actions. 
     Compulsions represent patterns of ritualistic behavior and thinking that are usually performed in response to an obsession. Whereas obsessions lead to an increase in subjective anxiety, compulsions reduce the person’s anxiety or discomfort. Compulsive behavior is designed to neutralize or to prevent discomfort or some dreaded event or situation. Most patients who seek treatment for obsessive symptoms also exhibit compulsive behaviors (Foa & Franklin, 2001; Parmet, Glass, & Glass, 2004). Compulsive patients fall into two primary groups: “cleaners” and “checkers.” Cleaning and washing rituals are associated with fear of contact with contaminating objects. For example, a patient who is afraid of contamination by germs or bodily secretions may spend hours each day bathing or disinfecting his or her home. This ritualistic behavior restores the patient’s sense of safety. Repetitive checking, on the other hand, is more often motivated by a fear of some catastrophic event. For example, a patient who experiences obsessive thoughts about gas explosions may engage in compulsive checking of the burners on a gas stove. 
     Some other behaviors that take a repetitive form and are associated with either a decrease or increase in anxiety have also been considered “compulsive” in the popular media. These include problems such as gambling, drug addiction, and exhibitionism. However, some important distinctions can be made between these actions and truly compulsive behaviors. First, addictive behaviors involve a pleasure-seeking component that is absent in compulsive behaviors. Second, the anxiety that is associated with the performance of criminal activities (e.g., stealing) is appropriate in light of social sanctions; obsessive-compulsive patients experience anxiety that is inappropriate to the situation. 
    O bsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) should be distinguished from obsessive-compulsive personality disorder (OCPD). The latter does not involve specifi c ritualistic behaviors; it is intended to refer to a general personality style. People with an obsessive-compulsive personality are preoccupied with orderliness and perfectionism as well as mental and interpersonal control. They are infl exible and overly devoted to work to the point that they avoid leisure activities and ignore friendships. 
     The phobic disorders (i.e., specifi c phobia, social phobia, and agoraphobia) are similar to OCD because they involve severe anxiety and are characterized by behaviors that are designed to reduce that anxiety. Some obsessive-compulsive patients also display phobic avoidance of situations associated with anxiety about dirt or contamination. There are, however, some important differences between OCD and the phobic disorders. For example, phobic patients do not show the same tendency toward superstitious or “magical” thinking that is often characteristic of obsessive-compulsive patients, nor do they manifest compulsive symptoms. Also, for the phobic patient, the anxiety-inducing stimulus is unrelated to the content of any obsessions the patient may experience. 
    O bsessive thoughts should also be distinguished from delusional beliefs. Two criteria are important in this regard. First, patients with OCD try, often desperately, to resist their intrusive ideas, whereas delusional patients do not. Second, most OCD patients are ambivalent about their thoughts; they realize the essential absurdity of their obsessions and compulsions at the same time that they are preoccupied with them. Some OCD patients do have relatively poor insight regarding the senseless nature of their obsessions, but  DSM-IV-TR requires for a diagnosis of OCD that, at some point during the course of the disorder, the person must recognize that the obsessions or compulsions are excessive or unreasonable (Eisen, Phillips, & Rasmussen, 1999). 
    D epression is a common complication of OCD. Two out of every three patients with OCD have experienced at least one episode of major depression at some point during their lives. The relationship between these phenomena is unclear. Sometimes compulsive symptoms appear before the onset of depression; in other cases, this relationship is reversed. The successful treatment or alleviation of depressive symptoms does not invariably lead to a reduction in the frequency of compulsive behaviors and vice versa (Abramowitz, Franklin, Street, Kozak, & Foa, 2000). 
    A lthough OCD was previously thought to be relatively rare, results from modern epidemiological studies suggest that milder forms of the disorder may affect between 2 and 3% of the general population at some point during their lives (Fullana et al., 2009). Prevalence rates among untreated community residents must be interpreted with caution, however, because there is disagreement about the best assessment procedures to use in collecting information and the most appropriate diagnostic criteria (Fontenelle, Mendlowicz, & Versiani, 2006). Data from England suggest that the true prevalence of OCD in the community may be closer to 1% (Torres et al., 2006). 
    R elatively little information is available regarding conditions that set the stage for later development of OCD. Nevertheless, some interesting clues were provided in one classic study. Kringlen (1970) reported the results of a 20-year follow-up assessment of 91 patients who had been hospitalized with obsessivecompulsive disorder. More than 80% of these patients had exhibited  nervous symptoms as children. They had typically been raised in strict, puritanical homes. The average age of onset for compulsive symptoms in female patients was between 10 and 20 years, although most of the women did not seek professional help until some years later. More than half of the patients showed an acute onset of symptoms following a specifi c stressful event. Marital problems were common among compulsive patients. 
     The prognosis for patients with OCD is mixed. Although the disorder can last many years, most patients do improve. One study conducted follow-up assessments with a group of patients 40 years after they had been treated in a hospital in Sweden (Skoog & Skoog, 1999). This was, of course, a group of severely disturbed patients because most people with OCD do not need to be treated in an inpatient setting. Nevertheless, the results suggest that 
    
 Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder 11
many patients recover from OCD. At the time of the fi nal follow-up, half of the patients had recovered from their disorder (defi ned as the absence of clinically relevant symptoms for at least 5 years). Another 30% showed some improvement, although they still experienced clinical symptoms. Approximately 20% of OCD patients do not improve following extended treatment (Besiroglu et al., 2007). 
     Karen was in many ways a typical OCD patient. She had, in fact, been raised in a strict, puritanical family setting. As a child, she was generally anxious and concerned with order and rituals. Since mid-adolescence, Karen had experienced diffi culty with intrusive, repetitive ideas that she found distressing. These problems would come and go without apparent reason. She was also prone to serious depression. Karen’s family background is also consistent with the literature on OCD (e.g., Pauls et al., 1995). There is a relatively high incidence of psychiatric anomalies—particularly obsessional traits, anxious personalities, and mood disturbances—among the biological relatives of obsessive-compulsive patients. 
     The similarity in behavior between many obsessive-compulsive patients and their parents probably refl ects the infl uence of both genetic and environmental variables (Grabe et al., 2006; Hudziak et al., 2004). In Karen’s case, her mother’s rigid, moralistic behavior may have had an important infl uence on the development of later symptoms. Karen’s mother provided a salient model for her daughter’s subsequent compulsive behavior. She also reinforced early tendencies toward such response patterns. 
 Theoretical Perspectives and Treatment Implications 
 According to traditional psychoanalytic theory, compulsive symptoms are the product of the ego’s unconscious attempt to fend off anxiety associated with hostile impulses. Freud (1909, 1925) argued that compulsive patients had experienced overly harsh toilet training and were therefore fi xated in the anal-sadistic stage of development. Such individuals presumably suffer serious confl ict over the expression of anger. Because these feelings are dangerous, or unacceptable to the ego, the anticipation of their expression is seen as anxiety provoking. This anxiety is dealt with primarily through the defense mechanism known as reaction formation, in which the original impulse (anger) is transformed into its antithesis (love or oversolicitude). This conceptual approach is not incompatible with Karen’s situation. Her principal symptoms were compulsive rituals that were intended to protect her children from harm. But her feelings about her children were, in fact, ambivalent. It would not be unreasonable to assume that she was most often very angry with them, perhaps to the point that she might have considered doing them physical harm. Of course, this impulse would be anxiety provoking to the ego, which would convert it to its opposite form. Thus, instead of injuring the children, she would spend a good deal of her time every day performing irrational responses aimed at protecting them. 
     Most contemporary therapists agree that people with OCD have trouble expressing anger (Moritz, 2011; Osborn, 1998). Some recognition was given to these considerations in the treatment that was employed. Karen’s anger and frustration were identifi ed as central features of her adjustment problems, but the therapeutic procedures went beyond the goal of insight-oriented treatment. Karen’s recognition of her anger and hostility was not suffi cient to effect change; specifi c training procedures were used to help her develop more adaptive responses. 
     Learning theorists would view Karen’s problems in a distinctly different fashion (Abramowitz, Taylor, & McKay, 2007; Houts, 2005). Within this general model, two factors would be given primary consideration. Both involve the principle of negative reinforcement, which states that the probability of a response is increased if it leads to the termination of an aversive stimulus. Consider, for example, the net effect of Karen’s rituals. Their performance ensured that she would be away from her home for extended periods of time. If she went to her neighbor’s house for coffee, she would be gone for at least two hours before she could consume enough cups and smoke enough cigarettes to satisfy the rituals. Grocery shopping, which she did by herself, had also turned into a long, complicated process. Given that being at home with her family was mostly an aversive experience for Karen, her rituals might be seen as an operant response that was being maintained by negative reinforcement. 
    A  behavioral clinician would be most likely to point to the anxiety reduction associated with the performance of the rituals. Whenever Karen was engaged in an activity that reminded her of numbers and, consequently, her children, she became anxious. She was able to neutralize this anxiety temporarily by counting the appropriate number of boxes and so on. This ritual was therefore reinforced and maintained by the reduction of anxiety. This notion is similar to the psychoanalytic view in that the symptom is produced as a means of reducing tension. The two theories differ in that the behavioral view does not see her anxiety as being directly attributable to the unconscious urge to harm her children, nor does the behavioral view hold that the anxiety reduction is mediated by an unconsciously activated defense mechanism. 
    S ome elements of the behavioral view were incorporated into the treatment procedure followed with Karen. In particular, by teaching her to be more assertive and to manage her children more effectively, the therapist was able to make her home life less aversive. She now experienced more pleasurable interactions with her children and her husband, and one important source of negative reinforcement for her rituals was removed. Unfortunately, this view of human behavior is fairly limited. In particular, it does not account for the importance of cognitive events. By focusing exclusively on environmental events, behaviorists may ignore important factors associated with the client’s perceptions, beliefs, and attitudes. These variables also seemed to play an important role in Karen’s problem. 
    C ognitive theories regarding the etiology of OCD emphasize the importance of excessive feelings of responsibility and guilt (Shapiro & Stewart, 2011). 
	Chapter 1 	Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder 	13
This viewpoint begins with the recognition that most normal people experience intrusive thoughts from time to time, especially when they have been exposed to stress or negative mood states. Most intrusive thoughts do not become persistent or troublesome because people do not assign special meaning to them. According to the cognitive model, obsessions may develop if people interpret their intrusive thoughts as proof that they will be responsible for harm (to themselves or others) if they do not do something immediately to correct the thought. People most likely to develop OCD may be those who (a) learned a broad sense of responsibility and a high level of conscientiousness at an early age, (b) were exposed to rigid and extreme codes of conduct and duty (e.g., have learned that some thoughts are particularly dangerous or unacceptable), and (c) experienced a critical incident in which their action (or inaction) or their thoughts seemed to be connected to a harmful incident that affected them or someone else. Alarmed by the intrusive appearance of forbidden thoughts, the person may struggle to avoid them, but cognitive events are diffi cult to control. In fact, active attempts at thought suppression often backfi re and increase the severity of the problem (Wegner, 1994). This vicious negative feedback loop magnifi es feelings of helplessness and loss of control and also serves to focus attention on the content of unwanted thoughts. The person’s anxiety level continues to escalate, and compulsive rituals are employed in an attempt to regain control over mental events as well as life experiences. 
     The relevance of this perspective to Karen’s case is clear. She had experienced frequent intrusive thoughts related to her children’s safety, and she did believe that a failure to act in response to these thoughts would result in harm coming to her children. As a child, Karen had been taught that certain thoughts and ideas were bad and that strict observation of the rituals of the church would guarantee her salvation and prevent harm from coming to her. These rituals became the primary means for controlling her fate and ensuring her safety. As an adult, Karen found herself stripped of these control mechanisms. The church now maintained that salvation (or the protection of one’s soul) depended more on faith than on the performance of specifi c overt behaviors. When Karen experienced the critical incident in which her friend’s infant daughter was injured, and she began to experience intrusive thoughts about harming herself, she turned to the use of private prayers in an attempt to protect herself. In some ways, Karen’s subsequent development of counting rituals represented a substitute for the formal religious practices she had learned as a child. She admitted that they were irrational and probably unnecessary, but they did reduce her immediate anxiety in much the same way that going to church had left her with a comforting feeling as a child. 
     Karen’s treatment addressed various cognitive factors, including efforts to improve her sense of self-control. Treatment was aimed initially at reducing the level of stress, improving Karen’s mood, and giving her alternative means of controlling her environment, such as assertion training and instruction in parenting skills. Considering her deeply ingrained religious beliefs, it was also judged necessary to help her reestablish contact with the church. After these procedures had achieved some modest success, it was possible to attack the counting rituals directly through the use of exposure and response prevention. A cognitive therapist would view the process of exposure and response prevention as a kind of “behavioral experiment” in which the person is given an opportunity to disconfi rm exaggerated beliefs about responsibility (i.e., “if I do not count the cereal boxes, something bad will happen to my children”). 
    A n extensive body of evidence indicates that behavior therapy is effective in treating compulsive disorders (Houghton, Saxon, Bradburn, Ricketts, & Hardy, 2010; Tolin et al., 2007). The most useful procedure seems to be  in vivo (i.e., in the natural environment) exposure coupled with response prevention (ERP). Studies that have compared ERP with control treatments, such as applied relaxation, have found that patients who receive ERP (typically between 15 and 20 sessions) are more likely to experience substantial improvement. Some patients, of course, refuse to enter or drop out of behavioral treatment, perhaps because it is initially anxiety provoking. Motivational interviewing can be used as an additional procedure to increase adherence to behavioral treatment methods (Riccardi, Timpano, & Schmidt, 2010). Among those who do complete ERP, approximately 80% have been classifi ed as improved, and most OCD patients maintain these improvements several months after the end of treatment. 
    C ognitive therapy is another psychological approach to the treatment of OCD (Abramowitz, 2010; Salkovskis, 1999). It is concerned primarily with the meanings that a person assigns to intrusive thoughts, images, and impulses. Symptoms of OCD are presumably more likely to occur if the person interprets the thoughts as an unquestionable sign that he or she is responsible for either causing or preventing harm that might come to oneself or other people. Cognitive therapy helps the person develop and use different interpretations of intrusive thoughts that do not require or motivate the person to continue to engage in compulsive rituals that are clearly ineffective and self-defeating. Treatment outcome studies report that this type of cognitive therapy can be an effective form of treatment for people with OCD (McLean et al., 2001). 
    M edication is also benefi cial for many patients. Clomipramine (Anafranil) has relatively specifi c effects in reducing OCD symptoms; its therapeutic effects cannot be attributed solely to a reduction in comorbid depressive symptoms (Kim, Koo, & Kim, 2010). Sustained improvement depends on continued use of the drug. Most patients experience a return of OCD symptoms within 4 weeks after they stop taking the medication. The newer generation of antidepressant drugs known as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), including fl uoxetine (Prozac), fl uvoxamine (Luvox), and sertraline (Zoloft), has also been used with OCD patients. Controlled studies indicate that these drugs are also effective in the treatment of OCD (Dell’Osso, Nestadt, Allen, & Hollander, 2006). The SSRIs are often preferred to other forms of medication because they have fewer side effects. 
	Chapter 1 	Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder 	15
    S everal issues will need to be addressed in future studies of treatment outcome. Relatively few direct comparisons of medication and ERP have been reported. It is not clear whether the combination of pharmacological and behavioral treatments is more effective than either one by itself (Albert & Brunatto, 2009). Perhaps more important, it is not currently possible to predict whether a particular patient will respond better to ERP or to medication. In actual clinical practice, medication is often used in combination with behavioral therapy for the treatment of OCD. 
    W hen both psychotherapy and medication fail, one other form of treatment may be considered: neurosurgery, which refers to techniques in which neural pathways in the brain are surgically altered in an effort to change the person’s behavior. Although neurosurgery was originally intended to be used with psychotic patients, clinical research indicates that it may be most effective with obsessive-compulsive disorder (Csigó et al., 2010). One longitudinal study described 26 patients who had received neurosurgery after failing to respond to all other forms of treatment. In comparison to similar OCD patients who had not received surgery, 10 of the 26 patients were obviously improved several years after the procedure was performed, 6 others showed mild improvement, 6 were unchanged, and 4 had gotten worse (Hay et al., 1993). Because the duration of illness prior to surgery was several years for all the patients in this study, the reported rates of improvement are probably not due to placebo effects or spontaneous remission. 
     These results cannot be ignored, but they should also be interpreted with considerable caution. First, it is virtually impossible to conduct a double-blind evaluation of neurosurgery. Second, surgical procedures have varied widely across studies, thus making general statements about neurosurgery questionable. Third, and perhaps most important, neurosurgery may produce general changes in the patient’s intellectual and emotional capacities. These changes remain unpredictable and poorly understood. Thus, most investigators agree that such radical procedures should be considered only when the patient’s symptoms are chronic and severely disturbing and when other treatment programs have already been unsuccessful. 
 Discussion Questions 

1. What is the difference between an obsession and a delusional belief? In what ways are obsessions different from the everyday worries that all of us experience? 
2. Most people experience brief intrusive thoughts, impulses, and images on a regular basis. Could the ability to experience such thoughts be adaptive, from an evolutionary perspective? When does the pattern cross the line to become maladaptive? 
3. W hat impact does obsessive-compulsive disorder have on other members of a patient’s family? Should the person’s spouse agree to tolerate or participate in compulsive rituals, such as special cleaning or checking procedures? 
4. E xposure and response prevention is a challenging treatment procedure that can be anxiety provoking for patients. How hard should therapists push their patients to participate in treatments that will be upsetting in the short run if they know that they will be successful in the long run? 

 CHAPTER  2
 Panic Disorder with Agoraphobia 
D ennis Holt was 31 years old, divorced, and a successful insurance salesman. He had experienced panic attacks on several occasions during the past 10 years, but he did not seek psychological treatment until shortly after the last incident. It happened while Dennis and his fi ancée, Elaine, were doing their Christmas shopping at a local mall. Their fi rst stop was a large department store, where Elaine hoped to fi nd a present for her mother. Dennis was in a good mood when they arrived at the store. Although he was usually uneasy in large crowds of people, he was also caught up in the holiday spirit and was looking forward to spending the bonus that he had recently received from his company. Ten minutes after they began shopping, Dennis suddenly felt very sick. His hands began to tremble uncontrollably, his vision became blurred, and his body felt weak all over. He experienced a tremendous pressure on his chest and began to gasp for breath, sensing that he was about to smother. These dramatic physical symptoms were accompanied by an overwhelming sensation of apprehension. He was terrifi ed but did not know why. Without saying anything to Elaine, he whirled and dashed from the store, seeking refuge in their car, which was parked outside. Once there, he rolled down the windows to let in more air, lay down on the back seat, and closed his eyes. He continued to feel dizzy and short of breath for about 10 minutes more. 
     Elaine did not fi nd him for more than an hour because she had been browsing in an adjacent aisle and had not seen him fl ee from the store. When she noticed that he was gone, she looked for him in other stores before she realized that something was wrong and fi nally decided to check the car. This was the fi rst panic attack that Dennis had experienced since he and Elaine had begun dating several months previously. After they returned to his apartment, he explained what had happened and his past history of attacks in somewhat greater detail; she persuaded him to seek professional help. 
    W hen Dennis arrived at the psychological clinic for his fi rst appointment, he was neatly dressed in an expensive suit. He was fi ve minutes early, so the receptionist asked him if he would like to take a seat in the large, comfortably 
17
furnished waiting room where several other clients were sitting. Politely indicating that he would prefer to stand, Dennis leaned casually against the corridor wall. Everything about his physical appearance—his posture, his neatly trimmed hair, his friendly smile—conveyed a sense of confi dence and success. Nothing betrayed the real sense of dread he had struggled with since he had promised Elaine that he would consult a psychologist. Was he, in fact, crazy? He wanted help, but he did not want anyone to think that he was emotionally unstable. 
     The fi rst interview was not very productive. Dennis cracked jokes with the psychologist and attempted to engage in an endless sequence of witty small talk. In response to the psychologist’s persistent queries, Dennis explained that he had promised his fi ancée that he would seek some advice about his intermittent panic attacks. Nevertheless, he was reluctant to admit that he had any really serious problems, and he evaded many questions pertaining to his current adjustment. Dennis seemed intent on convincing the psychologist that he did not have a serious psychological problem. He continued to chat on a superfi cial level and, at one point, even began asking the psychologist whether she had adequate life insurance coverage. 
     In subsequent sessions, it became clear that the panic attacks, which never occurred more than two or three times per year, were simply the most dramatic of Dennis’s problems. He was also an extremely tense and anxious person between attacks. He frequently experienced severe headaches that sometimes lasted for several hours. These generally took the form of a steady, diffuse pain across his forehead. Dennis also complained that he could not relax, noting that he suffered from chronic muscle tension and occasional insomnia. His job often required that he work late in the evening, visiting people in their homes after dinner. When he returned to his apartment, he was always “wound up” and on edge, unable to sleep. He had tried various distractions and popular remedies, but nothing had worked. 
     Dennis was very self-conscious. Although he was an attractive man and one of the most successful salespersons in his fi rm, he worried constantly about what others thought of him. This concern was obvious in his behavior both before and after sessions at the clinic. At the end of every session, he seemed to make a point of joking loudly so that anyone outside the psychologist’s offi ce would hear the laughter. He would then open the door, as he continued to chuckle, and say something like, “Well, Alicia [the therapist’s fi rst name], that was a lot of fun. Let’s get together again soon!” as he left her offi ce. The most peculiar incident of this sort occurred prior to the fourth treatment session. Dennis had avoided the clinic waiting room on past visits, but this time it happened that he and his therapist met at a location that required them to walk through the waiting room together to reach her offi ce. Thinking nothing of it, the therapist set off across the room in which several other clients were waiting, and Dennis quickly followed. When they reached the middle of the long room, Dennis suddenly clasped his right arm around her shoulders, smiled, and in a voice that was slightly too loud said, “Well, Alicia, what’s up? How can I help you today?” The 
    
	Panic Disorder with Agoraphobia 	19
therapist was taken completely by surprise but said nothing until they reached her offi ce. Dennis quickly closed the door and leaned against the wall, holding his hand over his heart as he gulped for air. He was visibly shaken. After he had caught his breath, he apologized profusely and explained that he did not know what had come over him. He said that he had always been afraid that the other people in the clinic, particularly the other clients, would realize that he was a client and therefore think he was crazy. He had become extremely uncomfortable as they walked across the waiting room and had been unable to resist the urge to divert attention from himself by seeming to be a therapist. 
    T his preoccupation with social evaluation was also evident in Dennis’s work. He became extremely tense whenever he was about to call on a prospective client. Between the point at which an appointment was arranged and his arrival at the person’s home, Dennis worried constantly. Would he or she like him? Could he make the sale? His anxiety became most exaggerated as he drove his car to the person’s home. In an effort to cope with this anxiety, Dennis had constructed a 45-minute audio recording that he played for himself in the car. The recording contained a long pep talk, in his own voice, in which he continually reassured and encouraged himself: “Go out there and charm ’em, Dennis. You’re the best damn salesman this company’s ever had! They’re gonna be putty in your hands. Flash that smile, and they’ll love you!” and on and on. Unfortunately, the net effect of the recording was probably an increase to his tension. Despite this anxiety, he managed to perform effectively in the selling role, just as he was able to project an air of confi dence in the clinic. But, on the inside, he was miserable. Every 2 or 3 months, he would become convinced that he could no longer stand the tension and decide to quit his job. Then he would make a big sale or receive a bonus for exceeding his quota for that period and change his mind. 
 Social History 

D ennis was an only child. His father was an accountant, and his mother was an elementary-school teacher. No one else in his family had been treated for adjustment problems. 
    D ennis and his mother got along well, but his relationship with his father had always been diffi cult. His father was a demanding perfectionist who held very high, probably unrealistic, expectations for Dennis. When Dennis was in elementary school, his father always wanted him to be the best athlete and the best student in his class. Although Dennis was adequate in both of these areas, he did not excel in either. His father frequently expressed the hope that Dennis would become an aeronautical engineer when he grew up. Now that Dennis was working as an insurance salesman, his father never missed an opportunity to express his disapproval and disappointment. He was also unhappy about Dennis’s previous divorce. When his parents came to visit, Dennis and his father usually ended up in an argument. 
     Dennis remembered being shy as a child. Nevertheless, he enjoyed the company of other children and always had a number of friends. When he reached adolescence, he was particularly timid around girls. In an effort to overcome his shyness, he joined the high school drama club and played bit parts in several of its productions. This experience provided an easy avenue for meeting other students with whom he became friends. He also learned that he could speak in front of a group of people without making a fool of himself, but he continued to feel uncomfortable in public-speaking and social situations. 
    A fter graduating from high school, Dennis attended a private liberal arts college for two years. Although he had been a reasonably good student in high school, he began to experience academic problems in college. He attributed his sporadic performance to test anxiety. In his own words, he “choked” on examinations. Shortly after he entered the classroom, the palms of his hands would begin to perspire profusely. Then his breathing would become more rapid and shallow, and his mouth would become very dry. On the worst occasions, his mind would go blank. 
     Some of his instructors were sympathetic to the problem and allowed him to take extra time to fi nish examinations; others permitted him to turn in supplementary papers that were written out of class. Nevertheless, his grades began to suffer, and by the end of his fi rst year, he was placed on academic probation. 
    D uring his second year in college, Dennis began to experience gastrointestinal problems. He had always seemed to have a sensitive stomach and avoided rich or fried foods that often led to excessive fl atulence or nausea. Now the symptoms were getting worse. He suffered intermittently from constipation, cramping, and diarrhea. He would frequently go for 3 or 4 days without having a bowel movement. During these periods, he experienced considerable discomfort and occasional severe cramps in his lower abdominal tract. These problems persisted for several months until, at the urging of his roommate, Dennis fi nally made an appointment for a complete gastrointestinal examination at the local hospital. The physicians were unable to fi nd any evidence of structural pathology and diagnosed Dennis’s problems as irritable bowel syndrome. They prescribed some medication, but Dennis continued to suffer from intermittent bowel problems. 
    D ennis had several girlfriends and dated regularly throughout high school and college. During his sophomore year in college, he developed a serious relationship with Mary, who was a freshman at the same school. She and Dennis shared some interests and enjoyed each other’s company, so they spent a great deal of time together. At the end of the academic year, Dennis decided that he had had enough of college. He was bored with his classes and tired of the continual pressure from his parents to get better grades. An older friend of his had recently landed a well-paying job with an insurance fi rm, so Dennis decided that he would complete applications with a number of companies. He was offered a position in sales with a company in a nearby state. Mary decided that she would also drop out of school. She and Dennis began living together, and they were married 2 years later. 
Panic Disorder with Agoraphobia 21
     Dennis and Mary were reasonably happy for the fi rst 3 years. He was successful at his job, and she eventually became a licensed realtor. As they were both promoted by their respective fi rms, they found themselves spending more and more time working and less and less time with each other. Their interests also began to diverge. When Mary had some time off or an evening free, she liked to go out to restaurants and parties. Dennis liked to stay home and watch television. 
     Dennis’s fi rst real panic attack occurred when he was 24 years old. He and Mary were at a dinner theater with three other couples, including Mary’s boss and his wife. The evening had been planned for several weeks, despite Dennis’s repeated objections. He was self-conscious about eating in public and did not care for Mary’s colleagues; he had fi nally agreed to accompany her because it seemed that it would be important for her advancement in the fi rm. He was also looking forward to seeing the play, which would be performed after the meal was served. As the meal progressed, Dennis began to feel increasingly uncomfortable. He was particularly concerned that he might experience one of his gastrointestinal attacks during dinner and be forced to spend the rest of the evening in the men’s restroom. He did not want to have to explain the problem to all of Mary’s friends. In an attempt to prevent such an attack, he had taken antispasmodic medication for his stomach and was eating sparingly. Just as everyone else had fi nished eating dessert, Dennis began to experience a choking sensation in his throat and chest. He could not get his breath, and it seemed certain to him that he was going to faint on the spot. Unable to speak or move, he remained frozen in his seat in utter terror. The others quickly realized that something was wrong, and assuming that he had choked on some food, Mary began to pound on his back between the shoulder blades. There was now a sharp pain in his chest, and he began to experience heart palpitations. Dennis was fi nally able to wheeze that he thought he was having a heart attack. Two of the other men helped him up, and a waiter directed them to a lounge in the building where he was able to lie down. In less than 30 minutes, all of the symptoms had passed. Dennis and Mary excused themselves from the others and drove home. 
    D ennis was frightened by this experience, but he did not seek medical advice. He was convinced that he was in good physical condition and attributed the attack to something he had eaten or perhaps to an interaction between the food and medication. He did, however, become even more reluctant to go to restaurants with Mary and her friends. Interestingly, he continued to eat business lunches with his own colleagues without apparent discomfort. 
     The second panic attack occurred about 6 months later, while Dennis was driving alone in rush-hour traffi c. The symptoms were essentially the same: the sudden sensation of smothering, accompanied by an inexplicable, intense fear. Fortunately, Dennis was in the right lane of traffi c when the sensation began. He was able to pull his car off the road and lie on the seat until the experience was over. 
    B y this point, Dennis was convinced that he needed medical help. He made an appointment with a specialist in internal medicine who gave him a complete physical examination. There was no evidence of cardiovascular or gastrointestinal pathology. The physician told Dennis that the problem seemed to be with his nerves and gave him a prescription for alprazolam (Xanax), a high-potency benzodiazepine often used in treating anxiety disorders and insomnia. Dennis took 2 milligrams of Xanax three times per day for 4 months. It did help him relax and, in combination with his other medication, seemed to improve his gastrointestinal distress. However, he did not like the side effects (such as drowsiness and lightheadedness) or the feeling of being dependent on medication to control his anxiety. He saw the latter as a sign of weakness and eventually discontinued taking the Xanax (decreasing his daily dosage gradually, as recommended by his physician). 
     Mary asked Dennis for a divorce 3 years after they were married (2 years after his fi rst panic attack). It came as no surprise to Dennis; their relationship had deteriorated considerably. He had become even more reluctant to go out with her in the evening and on weekends, insisting that he needed to stay home and rest his nerves. He was very apprehensive in crowded public places and also careful about where and when he drove his car. He tried to avoid rush-hour traffi c. When he did drive in heavy traffi c, he always stayed in the right lane, even if it was much slower, so that he could pull off the road if he had an attack. Long bridges made him extremely uncomfortable because they did not afford an opportunity to pull over; he dreaded 
the possibility of being trapped on a bridge during one of his “spells.” 
    T hese fears did not prevent him from doing his work. He continued to force himself to meet new people, and he drove long distances every day. The most drastic impact was on his social life. These increased restrictions led to greater tension between Dennis and Mary. They had both become more and more irritable and seldom enjoyed being with each other. When she decided that she could no longer stand to live with him, he agreed to the divorce. 
    A fter Mary left, Dennis moved to an apartment in which he was still living when he entered treatment 5 years later. His chronic anxiety, occasional panic attacks, headaches, and gastrointestinal problems persisted relatively unchanged, although they varied in severity. He had a number of friends and managed to see them fairly frequently. He did, however, avoid situations that involved large crowds. He would not, for example, accompany his friends to a professional football game, but he did like to play golf, where he could be out in the fresh air with very few people and a lot of open space around him. He met Elaine 4 years after the divorce. She was slightly older than he and much less active socially than Mary had been. They enjoyed spending quiet evenings watching television and occasionally got together with one or two other couples to play cards. Although they planned to get married, neither Dennis nor Elaine wanted to rush into anything. 
 Conceptualization and Treatment 

 When Dennis entered treatment, he expressed a desire to learn how to control his anxiety, particularly when it reached its most excessive proportions in the 
	Panic Disorder with Agoraphobia 	23
form of panic attacks. He did not feel comfortable taking medication because he considered it to be an artifi cial “crutch.” He had read about cognitive-behavioral approaches to the treatment of anxiety and was looking for a psychologist with whom he could follow such an approach. He had, in fact, found such a person. 
     The diffi culties that Dennis had experienced over the past several years included a complex blend of generalized anxiety and occasional panic attacks. His therapist viewed Dennis’s problems as being the result of an interaction between vulnerability to stress and various cognitive and behavioral responses that exacerbate and maintain high levels of anxiety. Like many other patients with panic disorder, Dennis had experienced his fi rst panic attack during an event that he perceived to be very stressful (the dinner with his wife’s boss). After that traumatic experience, he became increasingly afraid of (and tried to avoid) situations in which he might have another attack. This avoidance was maintained, in part, by distorted and unrealistic things that he said to himself about future events and his interactions with other people. For example, Dennis believed that it would be a catastrophe if someone did not like him. He also insisted to himself that he had to be the best salesperson in this fi rm, and, if he was not, then he would be a failure. These maladaptive attitudes had most likely been instilled in Dennis by his father, who had continually emphasized his demand for perfection and whose affection seemed to hinge on its attainment. More useful self-statements would have to be substituted for these maladaptive demands before Dennis would feel more comfortable in social situations, particularly those that involved his work. 
    T he therapist agreed to help Dennis reduce his generalized anxiety as well as to help him eliminate panic attacks. In Dennis’s case, this was particularly important because his panic attacks were relatively infrequent. The reduction in generalized anxiety would be accomplished by teaching him more appropriate ways of coping with, and thinking about, his environment. Treatment would include applied relaxation training and cognitive restructuring. After these skills were learned, therapy sessions would turn to situational exposure aimed at decreasing Dennis’s avoidance of situations in which he feared having another panic attack. The process of discussing this conception of the problem and arriving at a treatment plan was accompanied by an obvious change in Dennis’s behavior toward the therapist. He became much less defensive and dropped his annoying, superfi cial displays of bravado when he realized that the psychologist intended to function as a teacher, not as a judge who would rule on his sanity. 
     The therapist decided to begin treatment with training in relaxation. Her purpose at the outset was not to eliminate the occurrence of any more panic attacks. They were, of course, the most dramatic and perhaps the most diffi cult of Dennis’s problems. But their infrequency also meant that even if Dennis learned to control them, he would not be able to notice any improvement in his adjustment for a long time. Therefore, the therapist’s fi rst goal was to select a simpler problem and an area in which Dennis could see rapid improvement, thus enhancing his motivation for further change efforts. The most suitable place to begin, therefore, was his inability to relax when he returned to his apartment after work. 
     Relaxation training was introduced to Dennis as an active coping skill that he could use to control muscular tension. The therapist explained that she would begin by teaching Dennis how to use the procedure in the clinic setting. Dennis would be expected to practice relaxation at home on a daily basis for several weeks. He was cautioned against expecting a sudden change in his anxiety level and was told that, for most people, the development of relaxation skills takes considerable effort. 
    R elaxation training began during the sixth treatment session. The therapist asked Dennis to stretch out in a comfortable reclining chair and then demonstrated the procedure, which involved the alternate tensing and relaxing of a sequence of muscle groups. The therapist drew Dennis’s attention to his pattern of breathing and asked him to take deep, slow breaths. When Dennis was comfortable, the therapist asked him to lift his forearms off the arms of the chair and tighten his hands into fi sts. He was instructed to hold that position for fi ve seconds, noting the muscle tension, and then let go. This cycle was repeated through a sequence of several other groups of muscles. Throughout this process, the therapist reminded Dennis to breathe slowly and deeply. 
     Dennis responded positively to relaxation training. He felt awkward and self-conscious at the beginning of the procedure but quickly overcame his apprehension. Although he did not think that he had reached a state of complete relaxation, he did feel much more relaxed than he had when he arrived for the session; he indicated that he was looking forward to practicing the procedure during the coming week. The therapist explained a subjective rating scale that he could use to keep track of his progress. Using a 10-point scale, with 1 being  complete relaxation (“similar to the quiet, drifting feeling that you have before you go to sleep”) and 10 being  maximum tension (“like you feel when you’ve already had a tough day and a potential client has just decided against buying a policy”), Dennis was asked to keep a record of his subjective level of tension before and after each practice session. 
    D ennis was faithful in completing his homework assignment. His average self-rating of tension was about 6 or 7 before practice and 3 or 4 at the end of each session. He enjoyed the exercise and was pleased fi nally to be learning a skill to help him cope with his tension. His outlook was clearly hopeful. 
    B y the end of the fi rst month of training, Dennis was consistently able to reduce his subjective tension to a level of 1 or 2 at the end of each practice session. His only problem arose in trying to use the procedure during periods of very high tension. For example, during the second week of practice, he had tried unsuccessfully to use the exercise to eliminate a severe headache that had developed in the afternoon and persisted throughout the evening. The therapist pointed out that Dennis should not be discouraged because he had not reached a stage of profi ciency that would allow him to deal with the most serious levels of stress. She also noted that the object of relaxation was primarily to teach Dennis to 
    
be aware of muscular tension before it had progressed to such an advanced level. Relaxation could therefore be seen as a kind of preventive procedure, not as a way of coping with problems such as headaches after they became severe. 
    A fter Dennis was making satisfactory progress with relaxation, the therapist shifted the focus of their discussions to introduce a process known as cognitive restructuring. She began with the observation that emotions, or feelings, are infl uenced by what people say to themselves. In other words, it is not necessarily the objective situation with which we are confronted, but rather what we tell ourselves about the situation that determines our emotional response. For example, a woman who is fearful when speaking in front of a large group of people is not in physical danger. It is probably what that woman is telling herself about the audience (“They’ll all think I’m stupid,” or “I’m sure none of them will like me”) that leads to undue levels of anxiety. The therapist explained the general principles behind cognitive restructuring while carefully avoiding specifi c reference to Dennis’s own experience. 
    A fter Dennis understood the assumptions behind cognitive restructuring, the therapist outlined several cognitive distortions that are associated with severe anxiety. One example, called  probability overestimation, refers to the tendency to overestimate the probability that a negative event will occur. Another form of cognitive distortion, called  catastrophic thinking,  refers to the tendency to exaggerate the consequences of negative events. People who engage in this type of thinking act as though an imagined event would be completely devastating when, in fact, it would be more accurate to say it would be unpleasant but tolerable. 
     Dennis was intrigued by these notions and, throughout the discussion, often thought of examples of situations in which other people (such as his former wife, Mary) seemed to be making themselves unhappy by engaging in cognitive distortion. As they talked further, the therapist asked Dennis if he could think of examples in which he engaged in this kind of thinking. Initially, this was diffi cult. The therapist noted that we are often unaware of the distorted thoughts; they have been so deeply instilled and overlearned that they become automatic. Confronted with an audience, the person with public-speaking anxiety does not actually whisper, “I have to be perfect in everything I do, including public speaking, and it is imperative that they all think that I am witty and clever. If they don’t, I’m a miserable failure.” The only subjective experience may be an immediate sensation of overwhelming fear. Nevertheless, that emotional response may be mediated by these self-statements. Furthermore, if that person could learn to think in a less distorted fashion (e.g., “I hope that I will do well and that many of the people will enjoy my talk, but if they don’t, it’s not the end of the world”), anxiety could be controlled. 
    T hese discussions fi lled the next several sessions. Much of the time was spent taking specifi c experiences that had been anxiety provoking for Dennis and analyzing the self-statements that might have accompanied his response. Many centered on contacts with clients. The applicability of the cognitiverestructuring approach to these situations was particularly evident given the audio recording that he had made to coach himself before appointments. The therapist pointed out that Dennis had been on the right track in this attempt to cope with his anxiety, but many of the statements created unrealistic expectations that probably exacerbated his problem. Instead of assuring himself that the client would like him because he was the best salesperson in the company, Dennis would have been better able to control his anxiety if he had reduced the demands that he placed on himself and recognized that the success or failure of his career did not depend on the outcome of a single client contact. 
    D ennis gradually became profi cient in noticing the distorted thoughts that led to his anxiety in various situations. At fi rst, he could only dissect these situations in discussions with his therapist. Together, they challenged his catastrophic thoughts and substituted more realistic, evidence-based reasoning. Dennis found it helpful to recognize that the impact of negative events (such as being turned down by a client) would be manageable and short-lived. The goal, of course, was to help him practice this skill until he could employ adaptive self-statements as a coping response before and during stressful experiences. To facilitate this process and provide for generalization of these new cognitive responses outside of the therapy sessions, the therapist asked Dennis to begin a diary. Each night, he was to take a few minutes to describe any situation in which he had become particularly anxious during the day. He was instructed to note distorted thoughts that might have been associated with his anxiety as well as complementary selfstatements that would have been more appropriate. After keeping this record for 4 weeks, Dennis noted that he was beginning to feel less anxious in social situations and during sales visits. 
     The fi nal step in treatment was concerned with Dennis’s avoidance of situations that had been previously associated with panic attacks. He had not experienced an attack in the 3 months since his fi rst visit to the psychologist, probably because he had refused to accompany Elaine to any movies, restaurants, or department stores. He was now able to achieve a state of relaxation quickly and without the aid of the formal tension-relaxation procedure. The therapist therefore decided to begin a program of exposure to feared and avoided situations. This would be accomplished  in vivo (i.e., in the natural environment) by having Dennis purposefully enter situations that had previously led to feelings of apprehension and dread and then remain there until he had successfully demonstrated to himself that he would not have a panic attack. At the beginning of treatment, this procedure would have been likely to fail because Dennis did not believe that he could handle such situations. The therapist noted that he had now acquired new skills with which he would be able to cope with whatever anxiety, if any, he might experience. 
    T hey intentionally began with a fairly easy situation and arranged for Elaine to accompany Dennis. He indicated that her presence would make him feel less vulnerable. His assignment for the week was to go to a specifi c department store, during the morning on a weekday when there would not be a large crowd present, and spend 15 minutes browsing in the men’s department, which was located just inside the front entrance. When this task had been successfully accomplished, Dennis and the therapist designed a hierarchy of stressful situations to which he would expose himself in sequence and for increasing amounts of time. These began with further simple situations, such as the fi rst one at the men’s department, and continued on to those that had previously been most diffi cult for him. The latter included activities such as attending a play with Elaine and sitting in the middle of a center row (where he did not have easy access to an aisle or exit). 
     The treatment sessions were terminated after 6 months. Dennis had made considerable progress during that time. He had successfully mastered all the situations in the exposure hierarchy and had not experienced a panic attack since the one that provoked his entry into treatment. His general anxiety level was also considerably reduced. He continued to experience occasional tension headaches, particularly after especially busy days, but they were less frequent (perhaps two or three each month) and less severe than they had been in the past. His insomnia had disappeared completely. Whenever he did have trouble sleeping, he would use the formal tension-relaxation procedure. In this way, he was able to eliminate muscular tension and simultaneously distract himself from whatever problems he was worrying about. Unfortunately, his gastrointestinal problems remained. He still suffered from intermittent constipation and diarrhea and continued to use medication to relieve these discomforts on an ad hoc basis. 
 Discussion 

D isorders in which anxiety is the most prominent symptom are quite common. During any given year, 17% of the people in the United States may suffer from at least one form of anxiety disorder, although only one out of four of these people receive treatment for the problem (Young, Klap, Shoai, & Wells, 2008). The  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders ( DSM-IV-TR; APA, 2000) recognizes eight disorders that involve anxiety and avoidance:
1. Panic disorder (with or without agoraphobia) 
2. Agoraphobia without history of panic disorder 
3. Specifi c phobia 
4. Social phobia 
5. Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) 
6. Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) 
7. Acute stress disorder 
8. Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) 
    M any people exhibit a mixture of symptoms and meet the criteria for more than one disorder (panic disorder and GAD, in Dennis’s case). Most individuals who meet the diagnostic criteria for GAD also qualify for a diagnosis of at least one other type of anxiety disorder or major depression (Moffi tt et al., 2007; Turk & Mennin, 2011). The  DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000) description and organization of anxiety disorders pay special attention to the presence or absence of panic attacks. These extraordinarily frightening experiences, which seldom last more than a few minutes, are discrete periods of apprehension or fear, accompanied by sensations such as shortness of breath, palpitations, chest pains, choking or smothering sensations, dizziness, perspiring, and trembling or shaking. Some patients, like Dennis, experience only one or two attacks a year, whereas others may have them on a daily basis. 
     The  DSM-IV-TR defi nition of a panic attack includes the following criteria: a discrete period of intense fear or discomfort, in which four (or more) of the following symptoms develop abruptly and reach a peak within 10 minutes:
1. Palpitations, pounding heart, or accelerated heart rate 
2. Sweating 
3. Trembling or shaking 
4. Sensations of shortness of breath or smothering 
5. Feeling of choking 
6. Chest pain or discomfort 
7. Nausea or abdominal distress 
8. Feeling dizzy, unsteady, lightheaded, or faint 
9. D erealization (feeling of unreality) or depersonalization (being detached from oneself) 
10. Fear of losing control or going crazy 
11. Fear of dying 
12. Paresthesias (numbness or tingling sensations) 
13. Chills or hot fl ushes 
    T he  DSM-IV-TR criteria for panic disorder require that the person experience recurrent, unexpected panic attacks. At least one of these attacks must be followed by a period of at least 1 month in which the person has worried about having further attacks or else changes his or her behavior as a result of the attacks. 
    I n phobic disorders, the most important element is a persistent, irrational fear of a specifi c object or situation that the person goes out of his or her way to avoid.  Agoraphobia is defi ned as an exaggerated fear of being in situations or places from which escape might be diffi cult, or in which help, if needed, might be unavailable. In severe cases of agoraphobia, the person becomes entirely housebound—unable to venture outside for fear of experiencing intense anxiety. Agoraphobics frequently report fear of becoming physically ill, fainting, having a heart attack, or dying, particularly during a panic attack. These fears increase if the person’s access to support (e.g., a companion) or an avenue of escape is blocked or impaired. Most cases of agoraphobia begin with the experience of panic attacks. 
     In contrast to the circumscribed fears seen in phobic disorders, generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) is characterized by unrealistic and excessive worry and anxiety occurring more days than not for at least 6 months. The person must exhibit three or more of the following symptoms in association with these worries: restlessness or feeling keyed up or on edge, being easily fatigued, having diffi culty concentrating, irritability, muscle tension, and sleep disturbance. 
     Dennis met the criteria for both panic disorder with agoraphobia and GAD. Although his panic attacks were not especially frequent, he was persistently afraid of having another. His behavior met the criteria for agoraphobia in that he was apprehensive about being in public places from which escape might be diffi cult. He had occasionally forced himself to enter such situations, but the constriction of his social activities had a very negative impact on his life. Dennis’s fear was not so severe that he was entirely housebound, but he did avoid public places from which he was afraid he might not be able to escape. 
     Dennis also met  DSM-IV-TR criteria for GAD (APA, 2000). His muscle tension was clearly evidenced by his inability to relax, his frequent tension headaches, and the constant fatigue from which he suffered. His irregular bowel movements and diarrhea were further signs of autonomic diffi culties. He experienced continual apprehension and frequently had diffi culty sleeping. 
     Data regarding the frequency of specifi c anxiety disorders in the community have been reported by investigators involved in a large-scale epidemiological study, known as the ECA study, concerned with the distribution of mental disorders in fi ve American cities (Robins & Regier, 1991). Approximately 6 out of every 100 people interviewed in a 12-month period reported some form of phobic disorder; some people fi t more than one subcategory. Specifi c phobias were the most common (about 5%), followed by agoraphobia (about 3%), and social phobias (about 2%). Specifi c phobias and agoraphobia were more common among women than men; gender differences are less pronounced for social phobias. GAD was also relatively common among people in this study, with a 12-month prevalence rate of 4%. Panic disorder, on the other hand, was the least common form of anxiety disorder. Slightly more than 1% of the subjects in the ECA study qualifi ed for a diagnosis of panic disorder during the 12-month period immediately prior to their interview. 
    D epression and drug abuse are often associated with anxiety disorders (Conway, Compton, Stinson, & Grant, 2006). At least half of all patients with an anxiety disorder have also experienced an episode of major depression at some point. Alcoholism and barbiturate abuse are common results of attempts to use drugs to cope with chronic tension and generalized anxiety. In fact, some patients become addicted to minor tranquilizers that have been prescribed by physicians. Fortunately, Dennis did not become dependent on the use of medication. Although Xanax did make him feel more relaxed, he resisted its use because it made him feel even less in control of his own emotions. 
    W hen people with panic disorder decide to seek treatment, most begin by going to a general medical clinic rather than a mental health facility (Craske et al., 2009). They are among the heaviest users of medical care. Dennis became convinced that he needed help after having a panic attack while driving in rushhour traffi c. Rather than consulting a psychologist or a psychiatrist, he visited a specialist in internal medicine. This pattern is important for a number of reasons. To avoid the use of inappropriate and expensive medical tests and treatments, primary care physicians must be alert to the possibility that many of their patients are suffering from mental disorders, especially anxiety and depression. Identifi cation and effective treatment of problems such as panic disorder can simultaneously minimize the distress experienced by patients and reduce the overall cost of medical services. 
     Unfortunately, it is sometimes diffi cult to make the distinction between anxiety disorders and other medical disorders. Patients with panic disorder experience a broad range of medical symptoms, including headaches, cardiovascular problems, and gastrointestinal diffi culties (Eaton et al., 1998). Again, Dennis’s experience is consistent with the literature on these points, including his chronic gastrointestinal problems. There is a strong connection between panic disorder and irritable bowel syndrome, which is the most common type of functional gastrointestinal disorder. 
 Etiological Considerations 
 Several twin studies have found that genetic factors are infl uential in the transmission of anxiety disorders, especially those that involve the experience of panic attacks (e.g., Hettema, Prescott, Myers, Neale, & Kendler, 2005). The data indicate that GAD is somewhat less heritable than other forms of anxiety disorder. Studies of the distribution of various psychological disorders in families also suggest that the etiology of some forms of anxiety and depression may be related. First-degree relatives of patients diagnosed as having both major depression and panic disorder show markedly increased rates of depression, anxiety disorders, and alcoholism in comparison to relatives of normals and those of depressed patients without anxiety disorder. Thus, biological factors appear to be important in the etiology of anxiety disorders, but environmental events are also infl uential. 
    T raditional psychological views of anxiety have been based on psychoanalytic and learning theories. Although there are obvious differences between these points of view, both theories treat anxiety as a signal of some expected negative event. Neither draws an important distinction between chronic anxiety and panic attacks. A psychoanalytically oriented therapist would have viewed Dennis’s chronic anxiety as a symptom of unconscious confl ict between the ego and previously punished id impulses (Compton, 1992). These impulses are usually presumed to be sexual or aggressive in nature and traceable to early childhood experiences. It might have been argued, for example, that Dennis secretly harbored violent impulses toward his father, who criticized and belittled him. Because he was also afraid of his father (a classic assumption of psychoanalytic theory) and because he would be punished if he harmed his father, these impulses were anxiety provoking and therefore repressed. But when he entered situations in which he might be evaluated by other people, he was reminded of his father’s criticism. The hostile impulses then became more intense, and his anxiety would increase proportionately. 
There was, however, no clear evidence to support this notion. Dennis did not hide his resentment of his father. They argued openly and frequently about every imaginable topic. 
    T he conditioning model would view Dennis’s problem as a fear response that had been learned through the association of previously neutral stimuli (e.g., a crowded theater) with a painful or frightening stimulus. After Dennis had learned to fear particular situations, his avoidance of them would presumably be reinforced by the reduction in anxiety that he experienced after he fl ed. There are a number of problems with this model (see Mineka & Zinbarg, 1995). One is that very few patients with anxiety disorders can remember having experienced a traumatic event. In Dennis’s case, his fi rst panic attack was certainly a terrifying experience, and the fear that he experienced may have become paired with the stimuli that were present when it occurred. This process might explain the maintenance of his desire to avoid crowded public places, but it does not explain the original onset of his intense fear. 
     Cognitive perspectives on anxiety disorders emphasize the way in which people interpret information from their environment (Roth, Wilhelm, & Pettit, 2005). Maladaptive emotions such as chronic, generalized anxiety are presumably products of self-defeating cognitive schemas. Some people make themselves unnecessarily anxious by interpreting events in a negative fashion. They view the world in a distorted manner that is biased against themselves. The negative thoughts and images that are triggered by environmental events lead to persistent feelings of threat and insecurity. 
    O ne cognitive theory of panic disorder was proposed by Clark et al. (1997), who argued that panic disorder is caused by catastrophic misinterpretation of bodily sensations. An anxious mood presumably leads to a variety of bodily sensations that accompany negative emotional reactions (changes in heart and respiration rates, dizziness, and so on). This process is accompanied by a narrowing of the person’s attention focus and increased awareness of bodily sensations. Next, the person misinterprets the bodily sensation as a catastrophic event. 
    C onsider how this approach might explain one of Dennis’s panic attacks. After he had his fi rst attack, Dennis became highly vigilant, watching for the slightest indication that he was having another one. If he became short of breath, for whatever reason, he would interpret the experience as being a sign that he was about to have another attack. This reaction ensured continued operation of the feedback loop, with the misinterpretation enhancing Dennis’s sense of threat and so on until the process would spiral out of control. Thus, according to the model by Clark et al., (1997) cognitive misinterpretation and biological reactions associated with the perception of threat are both necessary for a panic attack to occur. 
 Treatment 
 The therapist who treated Dennis combined the use of relaxation with a cognitive approach to his problems (e.g., Craske et al., 2009; Rodebaugh, Holaway, & Heimberg, 2004). She hypothesized that Dennis’s perceptions of social events and the things that he said to himself about these events played an important role in the maintenance of his anxiety. The therapist helped Dennis recognize the general kinds of self-statements that were associated with his anxiety and then modeled more appropriate statements that he would be able to use to cope more effectively with stressful situations. The latter component of the process is particularly important. In addition to helping Dennis gain insight into his problem, the therapist taught him specifi c cognitive skills (adaptive self-statements) that had previously been absent from his repertoire of coping responses. If insight had been suffi cient, Dennis would have experienced a decline in his anxiety level as soon as he recognized that he engaged in distorted thinking, but he did not. Positive change was evident only after a prolonged period of practice employing more realistic selfstatements, both in and out of therapy sessions. 
     It should also be noted that the therapist did not rely solely on the cognitive form of intervention. In addition to talking with Dennis about his problem, the therapist helped him learn specifi c behavioral responses (e.g., applied relaxation) and insisted that he confront various situations in the natural environment. This approach was founded on the realization that although cognitive variables may play an important role in the change process, the most effective treatment programs are performance based. This was clear in Dennis’s case. His apprehension in crowded public places was not signifi cantly reduced until he had actually mastered a series of such situations following the exposure procedure. 
    O ne version of cognitive-behavioral treatment for panic disorder includes some additional procedures that were not employed in Dennis’s case.  Panic control treatment typically follows a 12-session sequence and incorporates three specifi c methods (Barlow, 1997). First, cognitive restructuring is used to correct the person’s erroneous appraisals of physical sensations and to reduce the frequency of catastrophic thinking. Second, breathing retraining is used to help the person avoid hyperventilation (a common trigger for panic). Third, structured exposure to bodily sensations is employed to reduce the person’s sensitivity to cues that have come to be associated with panic attacks (e.g., increased heart and respiration rates). This is accomplished by having the person participate in a series of exercises such as running in place or breathing through a narrow straw. If the person has also developed agoraphobic avoidance,  in vivo exposure is also incorporated into the treatment program. 
    P anic disorder can also be treated with various forms of medication. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), which are widely employed in the treatment of depression, are also used for the treatment of panic disorder (Simon & Pollack, 2000). These drugs include fl uoxetine (Prozac) and fl uvoxamine (Luvox). In comparison to high-potency benzodiazepines such as alprazolam (Xanax), patients are less likely to become addicted to an SSRI, and they experience fewer problems when the medication is withdrawn. Tricyclic antidepressants, such as imipramine (Tofranil), are also effective in the treatment of 
    
	Panic Disorder with Agoraphobia 	33
panic disorder. Patients often prefer the SSRIs because they produce fewer side effects than tricyclic antidepressants. 
     Anxiety disorders are also treated with minor tranquilizers from the class of drugs known as benzodiazepines, which includes alprazolam (Xanax) and diazepam (Valium). Dennis had taken Xanax for a few months after his second panic attack. The benzodiazepines reduce many symptoms of anxiety, especially vigilance and subjective somatic sensations, such as increased muscle tension, palpitations, increased perspiration, and gastrointestinal distress. They have relatively less effect on the tendency to worry and ruminate. Some psychiatrists consider alprazolam to be the drug of choice for patients with panic disorder because it leads to more rapid clinical improvement than antidepressant medication, and it has fewer side effects. Several placebo-controlled outcome studies indicate that alprazolam is an effective form of treatment for patients with panic disorders (Verster & Volkerts, 2004). 
    O f course, some side effects are associated with the use of benzodiazepines. These include sedation accompanied by mild psychomotor impairment as well as problems in attention and memory. Dennis discontinued taking Xanax because he was bothered by these side effects. The most serious adverse effect of benzodiazepines is their potential for addiction. Approximately 40% of people who use benzodiazepines for 6 months or more will exhibit symptoms of withdrawal if the medication is discontinued (Shaner, 2000). 
    C ontrolled-outcome studies indicate that cognitive-behavioral procedures and medication are effective forms of treatment for the anxiety disorders (Roy-Byrne et al., 2005). One report compared several forms of intervention for panic-disorder patients (Barlow, Gorman, Shear, & Woods, 2000). More than 300 clients were randomly assigned to one of fi ve forms of treatment: cognitive-behavior therapy (CBT); antidepressant medication (imipramine); CBT plus medication; placebo medication; or CBT plus placebo. Clients were treated weekly for 3 months. Those who improved during this period were then treated once a month for 6 more months and followed up 6 months after treatment had been terminated. Medication and CBT were both found to be superior to placebo by the end of treatment. Panic attacks were signifi cantly reduced in both groups. There were no signifi cant differences between CBT alone and medication alone, although more patients dropped out of the medication group because of unpleasant side effects. Overall, the results of this study suggest that cognitive-behavioral procedures and antidepressant medication are effective forms of intervention for patients with panic disorders. 
 Discussion Questions 

1. Dennis met the diagnostic criteria for both panic disorder and GAD. Did he, in fact, suffer from two separate disorders? What does your answer say about the issue of comorbidity in the current classifi cation system? 
2. W hat is the difference between the anxiety experienced by a person who is having a panic attack and the anxiety of a person who engages in excessive worrying? Consider the intensity of the anxiety, its duration, and its focus. 
3. During his fi rst few meetings with his therapist, Dennis was self-conscious and defensive. How could his behavior have interfered with the development of the therapeutic relationship and with the initial assessment of his problems? What skills did the therapist need to use to avoid potential problems? 
4. Should a therapist actively encourage a patient to take medication that has been shown to be effective, even if the patient has strong objections to the use of a pharmacological approach to treatment? 

 CHAPTER  3
 Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: 
Rape Trauma 
 Jocelyn Rowley, a 20-year-old single woman, was a sophomore at a midwestern university. She had always been a good student, but her grades had fallen recently, and she was having trouble studying. Her academic diffi culties, coupled with some problems with relationships and with sleeping, had fi nally led Jocelyn to see a therapist for the fi rst time. Although she was afraid of being alone, she had no interest in her current friends or boyfriend. She told the therapist that when she was doing everyday things like reading a book, she sometimes was overcome by vivid images of violent events in which she was the victim of a mugging or an assault. These symptoms had begun rather suddenly, and together they made her afraid that she was losing her mind. 
    M ost of Jocelyn’s symptoms had begun about two months before she visited the university’s counseling service. Since then, she had been having nightmares almost every night about unfamiliar men in dark clothing trying to harm her. She was not having trouble falling asleep, but she was trying to stay awake to avoid the nightmares. During the day, if someone walked up behind her and tapped her unexpectedly on the shoulder, she would be extremely startled, to the point that her friends became offended by her reactions. When she was studying, especially if she was reading her English textbook, images of physical brutality would intrude on her thoughts and distract her. She had a great deal of diffi culty concentrating on her schoolwork. 
     Jocelyn also reported problems with interpersonal relationships. She and her boyfriend had argued frequently in recent weeks, even though she could not identify any specifi c problems in their relationship. “I just get so angry at him,” she told the therapist. Her boyfriend had complained that she was not emotionally invested in the relationship. He had also accused her of cheating on him, which she denied. These problems were understandably causing her boyfriend to distance himself from her. Unfortunately, his reaction made Jocelyn feel abandoned. 
35
     Jocelyn was afraid to walk alone to the library at night. She could not bring herself to ask anyone to walk with her because she didn’t know if she could feel safe with anyone. Her inability to study in the library intensifi ed her academic problems. Jocelyn’s roommates had begun to complain that she was unusually sensitive to their teasing. They noticed that she cried frequently and at unexpected times. 
    I n the course of the fi rst few therapy sessions, the psychologist asked a number of questions about Jocelyn’s life just prior to entering therapy. Because the symptoms had such a rapid onset, the therapist was looking for a specifi c stressful event that might have caused her symptoms. During these fi rst few sessions, Jocelyn reported that she had begun to feel more and more dissociated from herself. She would catch a glimpse of herself in the mirror and think, “Is that me?” She would walk around in the winter weather with no gloves on and be relieved when her hands hurt from the cold, because “at least it’s an indication that I’m alive.” 
     After several sessions, Jocelyn mentioned to her therapist that she had been raped by the teaching assistant in her English literature course. The rape occurred 2 months before she entered therapy. Jocelyn seemed surprised when the therapist was interested in the event, saying “Oh, well, that’s already taken care of. It didn’t really affect me much at all.” The therapist explained that serious trauma such as rape is rarely resolved by itself, and especially not quickly. When it became apparent that Jocelyn had not previously reported the rape to anyone else, her therapist strongly advised her to contact the police. She refused, citing a number of reasons, ranging from her conviction that no one would believe her (especially 2 months after the incident) to the fear of facing crossexamination and further humiliation. Without Jocelyn’s consent, the therapist could not report the rape because the information she had obtained from Jocelyn was protected by confi dentiality (the ethical obligation not to reveal private communications, in this case, between psychologist and client). There are some rare exceptions to this ethical principle. State laws require mental-health professionals to break confi dentiality and report cases of child abuse. Psychologists are also required to report clients who are imminently dangerous to themselves or others. These exceptions did not apply to Jocelyn’s situation. 
    J ocelyn gradually revealed the story of the rape over the next few sessions. She had needed help writing an English paper, and her T.A. had invited her to his house one night so that he could tutor her. When she arrived at the house, which he shared with several male graduate students, he was busy working. He left her alone in his room to study her English textbook. When he returned, he approached her from behind while she was reading and grabbed her. The T.A. forced her onto his bed and raped her. Jocelyn said that she had not struggled or fought physically because she was terrifi ed and stunned at what was happening to her. She had protested verbally, saying, “No!” and, “Don’t do this to me!” several times, but he ignored her earnest objections. She had been afraid to yell loudly because there were only other men in the house, and she was not sure whether or not they would help her. 
    
    A fter the rape, the T.A. walked Jocelyn back to her dorm and warned her not to tell anyone. She agreed at the time, thinking that if she never told anyone what had happened, she could effectively erase the event and prevent it from having a negative effect on her life. She went up to her dorm room and took an hour-long hot shower, trying to scrub away the effects of the rape. While describing these events to the therapist, Jocelyn shook and her voice was breathy. She kept saying, “You believe me, don’t you?” 
    F or several days after the rape occurred, Jocelyn believed that she had been able to keep it from affecting her everyday life. The more she tried not to think about it, however, the more times it came to mind. She began to feel stupid and guilty for having gone to a T.A.’s house in the fi rst place, and because she had not been able to anticipate the rape, Jocelyn wondered whether her own behavior had contributed to the rape: Had she dressed in some way or said something that indicated a sexual invitation to him? She was ashamed that she was not strong enough to have prevented the rape or its negative consequences. 
    J ocelyn had initially believed that only one aspect of her life changed after the rape; she no longer attended discussion sections for her English course. Unfortunately, several other problems soon became evident. Her exaggerated startle response became more and more of a problem because her friends were puzzled by her intense reactions to their casual, friendly gestures. Frequent nightmares prevented her from getting any real sleep, and she was having trouble functioning academically. She had no further contact with her T.A. unless she saw him while walking across campus. When that happened, she would duck into a doorway to avoid him. She also began to withdraw from relationships with other people, especially her boyfriend. He responded to this retreat by pressuring her sexually. She no longer had any interest in sex and repeatedly rejected his physical advances. All these problems fi nally made Jocelyn believe that she was losing control of her feelings, and she decided to seek professional help. 
 Social History 

 Jocelyn had grown up in a small midwestern town 100 miles away from the university. She was the oldest of three children. Both of her parents were successful in their professional occupations, and they were involved in the community and their children’s schools. Jocelyn had attended public schools and was mostly an A student. She was involved in several extracurricular activities. In high school, she had some trouble making friends, both because she was shy and because it was considered “nerdy” to be an A student. It wasn’t until she enrolled at the university that she was able to form a relatively large peer group. 
    J ocelyn’s parents were strict about dating and curfews. She had not been interested in attending large parties or drinking when she was in high school. She did have a boyfriend during her junior and senior years. They began dating when they were both 16 years old and became sexually involved a year later. That relationship had ended when they left their hometown to attend different colleges. 
     Jocelyn recalled that her high school boyfriend had occasionally pressured her into having sex when she thought it was too risky or when she was not interested. She denied having previously been a victim of sexual assault, although one incident she described did sound abusive to the therapist. When she was about 13 years old, Jocelyn went to a summer music camp to play the trombone, an instrument not usually played by a female. One day after rehearsal, the boys in her section ganged up on her, teasing her that “girls can’t play trombones!” One boy began to wrestle with her and, in the melee, placed a fi nger inside her shorts into her vagina. Jocelyn remembered yelling at him. The boy let her go, and then all the boys ran away. Jocelyn had never viewed that event as being assaultive until she thought about it in reference to being raped. 
     Jocelyn’s adjustment to college had been good; she made several friends, and most of her grades were good. She had never before sought psychological help. Jocelyn felt as if she had the world under control until she was raped by someone she knew. 
 Conceptualization and Treatment 

 As Jocelyn began to address her anxiety symptoms, additional problems were caused by other people’s reactions to the account of her rape. These diffi culties kept the focus of treatment away from her primary anxiety symptoms. After telling her psychologist that she had been raped, Jocelyn began to tell other people in her life, including her boyfriend and her roommates. Her roommates were understandably frightened by what had happened to her, and they tried to divorce themselves from the possibility that it might happen to them. They did this by either accusing her of lying or pointing out differences between them: “I never would have gone to a T.A.’s house,” or, “You’ve slept with more people than me; he must have sensed that,” or, “You didn’t look beat up; you must not have fought back hard enough.” The absence of meaningful support from her friends fueled Jocelyn’s progressive withdrawal. Her anxiety symptoms became more pronounced, and she also became depressed. 
     Her boyfriend’s unfortunate and self-centered reaction to the description of her rape quickly led to the end of their relationship. He sought help to cope with his own feelings about her rape by talking to some mutual friends. Jocelyn had specifi cally asked him not to discuss the attack with other people she knew. Jocelyn’s general feelings of being out of control of her life were exacerbated by her apparent inability to contain the spread of gossip about her assault. One specifi c event, which would have been trivial under ordinary circumstances, led to a series of heated exchanges between Jocelyn and her boyfriend. He approached her from behind and playfully put his arms around her. When she jumped and screamed in fright, he tightened his grip, preventing her escape. 
After arguing about this incident a number of times, they decided not to see each other anymore. 
     Jocelyn fi nally approached her English professor and told her that she had been sexually assaulted by the T.A. The professor’s reaction progressed from shock to outrage. She recommended that Jocelyn report the attack to the appropriate campus offi ce. Unfortunately, Jocelyn still refused. She was not ready to report her attacker to the university or to press legal charges, in part because she felt that she could not bear being in the same room with him for any reason. The professor did assign Jocelyn to a different T.A. so that she could continue to go to discussions for the class. She also told Jocelyn that she was uncomfortable letting the matter drop. She asked whether Jocelyn would mind if she discussed the situation with the dean and with campus police. Jocelyn agreed reluctantly, only after the professor promised not to use Jocelyn’s name in any of these conversations. 
     Treatment during this time focused primarily on giving Jocelyn an opportunity to express her considerable anger and frustration about her situation. Jocelyn frequently railed to her therapist against the unfairness of the situation. For example, to deal with her fear of walking alone after dark, she was trying to fi nd someone to walk with her. It seemed bitterly ironic, however, that she wanted a friend to protect her from violence from strangers. It was, after all, someone she knew rather well who had raped her. 
     Jocelyn also felt a great deal of guilt over not having been able to prevent her assault. Perhaps she hadn’t fought hard enough. Maybe she had unknowingly fl irted with him. Did he assume that she knew he was inviting her to his house for sex? Was she a fool for not having recognized that implicit invitation? She also felt guilty about the effect of her situation on her boyfriend and roommates. Was she responsible for the fact that she had made them fearful and resentful? 
    I n one session, the therapist pointed out that the intrusive images that Jocelyn now experienced while reading her English textbook might result from the fact that she had been reading that textbook when her attacker grabbed her from behind. Jocelyn was relieved to hear this explanation because she had worried that she really was going crazy. This insight did not immediately diminish the frequency of her intrusive images, however, and she remained frustrated and depressed. 
     By this time, Jocelyn’s nightmares had become increasingly severe. The content of her dreams was more and more obviously rape related. The dream would begin with Jocelyn in a crowded parking lot. Then a shadowy male in dark clothing would approach her, tell her he wanted to rape her, and proceed to attack her. She remembered trying to fi ght off the attack in her dream, but her limbs felt as if they were in thick glue and her struggles were ineffective. The other people in the parking lot stood watching, clapping and cheering for her assailant. Jocelyn would wake up in the middle of the room, crouched as if awaiting attack. These experiences terrifi ed Jocelyn, and they also frightened her roommates. 
    T he therapist’s treatment strategy moved to a focused, cognitive-behavioral intervention that had two main parts. The fi rst part was to address the cognitive processes that prolong a maladaptive view of traumatic events. Specifi c procedures included self-monitoring of activities, graded task assignments (such as going out alone), and modifi cation of maladaptive thoughts regarding the event (such as guilt and self-blame) (Yadin & Foa, 2007). This part of the treatment procedure had actually begun as soon as Jocelyn entered therapy. It was continued in parallel with the second part of the therapy, which is based on prolonged exposure. 
    I n prolonged exposure, the victim reexperiences the original trauma in a safe situation to decrease slowly the emotional intensity associated with memory of the event. This step is based on the notion that repeated presentation of an aversive stimulus will lead to habituation (defi ned as the process by which a person’s response to the same stimulus lessens with repeated presentations). Jocelyn had, of course, experienced many fl eeting and terrifying images of the rape during the weeks after it happened. This form of “reliving” the traumatic experience is symptomatic of the disorder. It presumably does not lead to improvement in the person’s condition because the experiences are too intensely frightening and too short-lived to allow negative emotions to be processed completely. In the therapy, Jocelyn was asked to relive the rape scene in her imagination. She described it aloud to the therapist in the present tense. The therapist helped Jocelyn repeat this sequence many times during each session. The sessions were recorded on audiotape, and Jocelyn was required to listen to the tape at least once every day. 
     As the end of the semester approached, Jocelyn was able to resume her studies. This was an important sign of improvement. Flunking out of school would have been the ultimate proof that the rape had permanently affected her life, and she struggled not to let that happen. She ended the semester by passing three of her four classes, including English. Therapy was terminated somewhat prematurely after 16 sessions (twice weekly for 8 weeks) because the semester was ending, and Jocelyn was going home for the summer. The psychologist could not convince her to continue therapy during the summer, although she still suffered from occasional nightmares and other symptoms. Jocelyn refused to see a therapist in the summer because she would have to tell her parents, and she was not ready to do that. 
     A follow-up call to Jocelyn when she returned the following spring, after having taken a semester off, revealed that Jocelyn had fi nally told her parents about the rape. They were much more supportive than Jocelyn had anticipated. She had continued treatment with another therapist, and her symptoms had diminished slowly over time. She now had nightmares only on rare occasions, and they were usually triggered by a specifi c event, such as viewing a sexually violent movie or when someone physically restrained her in a joking manner. Jocelyn decided not to return to therapy at the university’s counseling service, saying that she was tired of being preoccupied by the rape. She believed that it was time for her to concentrate on her studies. 
 Ten-Year Follow-Up 

J ocelyn performed well in school and on the job in the years following her rape. She completed college and then earned her master’s degree in library science. She enjoyed her work as a librarian at a small college in her hometown. Her social life recovered more slowly. Jocelyn experienced residual symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) intermittently for several years. She no longer met the formal diagnostic criteria for PTSD, however, because her symptoms were not suffi ciently frequent or severe. In the following pages, we describe her experiences during this time. 
    J ocelyn still suffered from occasional nightmares if she watched a movie or a TV show with a scene containing sexual violence. Rape scenes did not have to be overtly graphic to cause a nightmare. In fact, scenes in which a rape was alluded to rather than depicted on screen were just as disturbing to Jocelyn. She tried to avoid movies or TV shows with sexual violence. This decision might be interpreted as avoiding stimuli associated with her rape trauma (a symptom of PTSD). Her avoidance was also the product of Jocelyn’s conscious decision not to support the segment of the entertainment industry that profi ts from depicting such scenes. 
     Other examples of lingering mild PTSD symptoms included hypervigilance and increased startle response. Jocelyn was hypervigilant in situations that might present a threat to her own safety. For example, when speaking with a male colleague in his offi ce, she was often concerned about the distance to the door and the proximity of assistance if she called for it. Of course, we all protect ourselves by being cautious and alert. But Jocelyn found herself worrying too much about potential threats when none existed. This hypervigilance occasionally intruded on Jocelyn’s professional career. It could make her appear unnecessarily suspicious and aloof to her coworkers, especially the men. Jocelyn also continued to be jumpy if someone touched her from behind, though the degree of her startle response had diminished greatly since college. 
    T he residual effects of the rape trauma could also be seen in the way that Jocelyn struggled to control her temper, which had become volatile. When provoked, the intensity of her subjective response was often out of proportion to the situation. Events that would annoy or irritate most people (such as being treated rudely by a boss) would cause her to become enraged. Because she knew that the intensity of her anger was often inappropriate, she almost always suppressed it. Jocelyn was afraid of what might happen if she acted on her feelings. Suppressing her anger interfered with her ability to have discussions or arguments with other people. If Jocelyn was involved in a discussion, she would often concede a point with which she disagreed to avoid “blowing up.” She became unnecessarily timid about stating her opinions. 
     Jocelyn’s relationships with men were also affected by the lingering impact of her rape. For a period of time in her early 20s (immediately following the rape), Jocelyn avoided intimate contact with men entirely. She referred to this time as her “celibacy” years. Jocelyn avoided intimacy with men to sort through her own feelings about herself, her remaining guilt surrounding her rape, and her feelings about men. Several young men found her attractive during this time (perhaps because she was uninterested in them), but she rejected their overtures. Jocelyn’s parents and friends were afraid that surviving the rape had “turned her into a lesbian” because she was not interested in dating men. Perhaps in rebellion against her parents’ concerns, Jocelyn joined a women’s poetry cooperative and a women’s music group that included women of all sexual orientations. She found this community to be warm and supportive. She made several close female friends, but she never felt any sexual attraction to them. This was a diffi cult time in which Jocelyn forged new friendships and also reestablished relationships with her previous social support network whenever possible. 
     When Jocelyn eventually began dating again, she seemed to choose relationships that allowed her to avoid emotional intimacy. She pursued men who were inappropriate for her (such as someone who lived a thousand miles away, or someone who was already married). Her affairs were brief and even exciting, but they did not result in signifi cant, long-term relationships. At times, she could not imagine having a meaningful emotional relationship with a partner. Establishing clear consent to have intercourse prior to engaging in any type of sexual foreplay was of ultimate importance to her. Therefore, her sexual relationships tended to be “all or nothing”; she either had intercourse with the man she was dating or did not share any physical intimacy at all. Jocelyn realized later that she probably conducted her relationships in this fashion so that decisions of consent were as unambiguous and unemotional as possible. 
     Recognition of these ongoing diffi culties led Jocelyn to decide to go back into therapy with a local psychologist. She had just met a new boyfriend and seemed to sense something special about this relationship from the beginning. Jocelyn wanted to work on issues involving intimacy, trust, and sexuality, in the hope that progress in these areas would help her forge a better relationship with her new boyfriend (who did eventually become her husband). 
     During this therapy, Jocelyn acknowledged that she felt very close to her boyfriend, but she had a great deal of diffi culty learning to trust him. She found it hard to believe him when he said that he loved her. They were also having some trouble in their sexual relationship. Many forms of touching, if the touch was not gentle enough, were upsetting to Jocelyn. If her partner accidentally did anything that caused her discomfort during physical intimacy, Jocelyn would think to herself: “This is it. He’s been good until now, but now he’s going to hurt me.” Because of these irrational thoughts, Jocelyn frequently interrupted sexual contact with her boyfriend abruptly. He found these reactions confusing, and their relationship was becoming strained. 
     Jocelyn’s therapist used cognitive therapy to address these problems. Her goal was to eliminate the systematic biases in thinking that were responsible for Jocelyn’s maladaptive feelings and behavior. She treated Jocelyn’s distorted patterns of thinking and her biased conclusions as being testable hypotheses. She used their therapy sessions as an opportunity to identify, test, and challenge these hypotheses. Several strategies were employed. Her distorted thoughts were either decatastrophized  (developing what-if strategies to deal with feared consequences), reattributed  (considering alternative causes of events), or  redefi ned (changing the perspective of the problem so that the person feels some control over it). For example, Jocelyn’s reactions to painful stimuli during physical intimacy with her boyfriend were reattributed (Could your discomfort be the result of something other than his desire to hurt you?). Her fears during normal verbal arguments with men were decatastrophized (What is the worst thing that could really happen?). 
    T herapy also included some elements of anger-management training (Novaco & Taylor, 2006). In the initial phase of this process, Jocelyn learned to monitor her own anger and the situations that triggered it. Applied relaxation was employed to help her learn to regulate arousal in situations that were potentially provocative. The same cognitive-restructuring procedures that had been used to address her anxiety and fear were now used to help her modify distorted thoughts and misinterpretations of events that sometimes led to inappropriate anger. Finally, the therapist helped her to rehearse assertive communication skills that would allow Jocelyn to express herself clearly in situations that had previously led to withdrawal or the suppression of her true feelings. 
    C ognitive therapy and anger-management training helped Jocelyn improve her communication skills with others, including her boyfriend, as well as people at work. Her mood was more stable, and she felt better about herself. She also developed a deeper, more meaningful relationship with her boyfriend. They were married soon after the therapy was completed. 
    T he fact that Jocelyn’s PTSD symptoms persisted for several years after the rape may seem discouraging. Nevertheless, beyond her subtle relationship problems, the long-term impact of the rape was not devastating. Jocelyn was able to complete school, have a successful career, regain closeness with family and friends, and (with a little additional help in therapy) form an intimate and lasting relationship with a loving partner. She occasionally mourns the loss of her 20s because her relationships were so chaotic, but she also has many important plans and hopes for the future. 
 Discussion 

  R ape is an alarmingly frequent problem on college campuses and in other areas of our society (Elliott, Mok, & Briere, 2004). Consider, for example, the results of the National Health and Social Life Survey, the fi rst large-scale examination of sexual behavior in the United States since the Kinsey reports (Laumann, Gagnon, Michael, & Michaels, 1994). In this national probability sample of women between the ages of 18 and 59, 22% reported that they had been forced by a man to do something sexually that they did not want to do. Only 4% of these coercive sexual acts were committed by a stranger. 
     Unfortunately, most rapes are never reported. On college campuses, less than 5% of rapes are reported to police (Cole, 2006). Victims like Jocelyn, whose immediate reactions to the rape included intense fear, helplessness, avoidance, and emotional detachment, may be particularly unlikely to contact legal authorities. 
  S hould other people have reported Jocelyn’s rape when they heard about it? Her therapist was clearly prevented from fi ling a complaint by the ethical principle of confi dentiality. If her therapist had reported the rape against Jocelyn’s objections, the therapist would have violated her trust and seriously damaged their therapeutic relationship. Her English professor, on the other hand, was not strictly bound by this professional obligation. Policies guiding the behavior of faculty members in this circumstance currently vary from one university to the next and are the topic of heated debate. Some might argue that Jocelyn’s professor should have reported the rapist to police or campus administrators, even if it meant acting against Jocelyn’s wishes. One justifi cation would be to protect other students. Other people might believe that Jocelyn’s decision not to report the rape should be respected so that she would not feel even more helpless or out of control. Would she be exposed to further danger if charges were fi led without her knowledge? What would happen if the rapist tried to retaliate, and Jocelyn did not know that he had been confronted by authorities? What action could be taken against him without Jocelyn’s direct testimony, and how would his right to due process be protected? These are all diffi cult questions. We encourage people to seek advice on these matters from local police offi cials and from sexual assault resource agencies. Just as many state laws now require therapists to break confi dentiality to warn potential victims of violence, new regulations may be passed to deal with the plight of rape victims and the need to report this heinous crime. 
    O ne frequent outcome of rape is posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). PTSD is included in the  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV-TR ;  APA, 2000, pp. 467–468) under the general heading of Anxiety Disorders. PTSD is defi ned by the following criteria:
1. The person has been exposed to a traumatic event in which both of the fol-lowing were present:
a. T he person experienced, witnessed, or was confronted with an event or events that involved actual or threatened death or serious injury, or a threat to the physical integrity of self or others. 
b. The person’s response involved intense fear, helplessness, or horror. 
2. T he traumatic event is persistently reexperienced in one (or more) of the following ways:
a. R ecurrent and intrusive distressing recollections of the event, including images, thoughts, or perceptions 
b. Recurrent distressing dreams of the event 
c. Acting or feeling as if the traumatic event were recurring 
d. Intense psychological distress at exposure to cues that symbolize or resemble an aspect of the traumatic event 
e. Physiological reactivity on exposure to cues that symbolize or resemble an aspect of the traumatic event 
3. P ersistent avoidance of stimuli associated with the trauma and numbing of general responsiveness (not present before the trauma), as indicated by three (or more) of the following:
a. Efforts to avoid thoughts, feelings, or conversation associated with the trauma 
b. Efforts to avoid activities, places, or people that arouse recollections of the trauma 
c. Inability to recall an important aspect of the trauma 
d. Markedly diminished interest or participation in signifi cant activities 
e. Feeling of detachment or estrangement from others 
f. Restricted range of affect (such as being unable to have loving feelings) 
g. Sense of a foreshortened future (e.g., does not expect to have a career, marriage, children, or a normal life span) 
4. Persistent symptoms of increased arousal (not present before the trauma), as indicated by two (or more) of the following:
a. Diffi culty falling asleep or staying asleep 
b. Irritability or outbursts of anger 
c. Diffi culty concentrating 
d. Hypervigilance 
e. Exaggerated startle response 
5. Duration of the disturbance is more than 1 month. 
6. The disturbance causes clinically signifi cant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning. 
    T he rape and the fear surrounding it were clearly responsible for provoking the symptoms that Jocelyn experienced. One of the key elements of PTSD is the recurrence or reexperience of stimuli associated with the event. Jocelyn initially experienced this symptom in the form of intrusive, violent images that came to mind whenever she opened her English textbook. Her recurrent nightmares were another symptom linked to reexperiencing the event. Whenever one of these images or dreams occurred, Jocelyn would become extremely fearful and distract herself (escape) as quickly as possible. This type of reexperiencing of the trauma should be distinguished from the procedures used in cognitive-behavioral treatment. The latter is designed to ensure prolonged exposure in the context of a safe and supportive environment, which allows the person’s intense emotional response to diminish gradually. 
     Avoidance of rape-related stimuli has been shown to differentiate rape victims with PTSD from those rape victims who did not develop PTSD. Jocelyn’s avoidance was manifested by withdrawal from her friends, her decision not to report the rape, and perhaps her reluctance to return to therapy for several years. Her feelings of dissociation, such as asking, “Is that me?” when looking in the mirror, were another sign of Jocelyn’s avoidance. 
     Jocelyn’s increased arousal was consistent with the  DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000) description of PTSD. Her exaggerated startle response, irritability in interpersonal relationships, diffi culty studying, and sleep disturbance are all signs of the heightened arousal that is associated with this disorder. The length of time that had elapsed since the initial appearance of her symptoms and the obvious impact that these symptoms had on her adjustment also indicate that Jocelyn met the formal diagnostic criteria for PTSD. 
    T he term posttraumatic stress disorder was introduced to the formal diagnostic manual with the publication of  DSM-III in 1980 (APA, 1980). The concept of a severe and maladaptive reaction to a traumatic event was recognized many years earlier, but it was described in different terms. The disorder had been observed among soldiers returning from World War II and was known as Traumatic Neurosis of War in  DSM-I (APA, 1952). The category was dropped in the next edition of the diagnostic manual,  DSM-II (APA, 1968), even though the phenomenon had been well documented in combat veterans.  DSM-III (APA, 1980) returned the concept to the manual and listed it with other types of anxiety disorders. This version of the manual expanded the range of possible stressors from a limited focus on combat experiences to the consideration of any traumatic event that was “outside the range of usual human experience” (APA, 1980, p. 247). In other words, people who had been victims of a crime or survivors of a natural disaster might also develop the symptoms of PTSD. 
    F ollowing the publication of  DSM-III,  clinicians reported that many victims of rape suffered from the symptoms of PTSD. There were problems, however, with the way in which the disorder was described in the diagnostic manual. For example, epidemiological studies indicated that rape was not “outside the range of usual human experience.” Rape is not an uncommon event. The  DSM-III (APA, 1980) criteria also put the therapist in the diffi cult position of having to make a judgment about the expected or usual impact of an environmental event. The authors of  DSM-IV (APA, 1994) corrected some of these problems when they revised the criteria for PTSD. The traumatic event is now described as one in which the person experienced a threat of death or serious injury and responded with intense fear. This description clearly includes rape as a traumatic event. 
     The classifi cation of PTSD has been criticized on a number of grounds (McNally, 2003). Some scientists suggest that PTSD may not be a mental disorder because it is a reaction to an event that would be distressing for almost anyone. Thus, perhaps PTSD should be separated from anxiety disorders and placed in an etiologically based category along with other disorders that follow traumatic events. This grouping would include adjustment disorders and enduring personality changes that may follow trauma. This approach is currently used in the  International Classifi cation of Diseases ( ICD ; World Health Organization, 1990). 
    F urther questions about the classifi cation of PTSD as an anxiety disorder involve the nature of its core symptoms (Friedman, 2009; Zohar, Juven-Wetzler, Myers, & Fostick, 2008). Some symptoms in PTSD do involve anxiety, such as recurrent, intrusive images; avoidance; hypervigilance; and startle responses. These are similar to the symptoms of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), phobic disorder, and generalized anxiety disorder (GAD). But PTSD also shares many symptoms with dissociative disorders such as amnesia, fugue, and multiple personality. These include fl ashbacks, memory impairment, and body dissociation. These classifi cation issues will need to be addressed in future versions of the DSM. 
    I t is diffi cult to estimate the true prevalence of PTSD from epidemiological studies because the disorder is precipitated by traumatic events (Keane, Marshall, & Taft, 2006). These events may be personal, affecting one person at a time, as in the case of rape, but they may also be events that affect a large number of people simultaneously, as in the case of a hurricane. How many people in the general population are exposed to traumatic events that might trigger PTSD? The National Comorbidity Study (NCS) found that 60% of men and 51% of women reported at least one such traumatic event at some time during their lives (Kessler et al., 1999). Many of these people had been exposed to more than one traumatic event. The most frequently reported traumatic events were witnessing someone being badly injured or killed, being involved in a natural disaster, being involved in a life-threatening accident, and being the victim of an assault or robbery. These alarming numbers indicate that traumatic events are unfortunately a relatively common experience in our society. 
    T he overall rate of PTSD in the general population is higher for women (10%) than for men (5%) (Kilpatrick & Acierno, 2003). This pattern may be surprising in light of the fact that men are somewhat more likely to be exposed to traumatic events. How can it be explained? The NCS investigators suggest that, in comparison to men, women may be more likely to be exposed to traumatic events that are psychologically catastrophic. Rape is one example. Women are much more likely to be raped than men, and the rate of PTSD (for both male and female victims) is much higher following rape than following any other type of traumatic event. What are the distinguishing features of rape that account for its devastating impact? In comparison to many other traumatic events, rape involves directed, focused, intentional harm that is associated with the most intimate interpersonal act (Calhoun & Wilson, 2000). 
    T he prevalence rate for symptoms of PTSD is highest immediately after the traumatic event. Most rape victims (95%) show symptoms of PTSD within 1 or 2 weeks of the crime (although the person cannot technically meet the  DSMIV-TR criteria until after the symptoms have been present for at least 1 month). The rate tapers off over time, with 48% of the victims meeting the criteria for PTSD 3 months after the rape. For many people, PTSD can become a chronic condition (Kuwert et al., 2010). Jocelyn certainly experienced some symptoms of PTSD for many years, even though her overall condition had improved, and she no longer met the formal criteria for the disorder. 
 Etiological Considerations 
 Not all victims of trauma develop PTSD. What determines whether or not a victim will develop PTSD following a traumatic event? There do not appear to be systematic differences between crime victims who develop PTSD and those who do not in terms of demographic characteristics such as race, employment, education, and income. One common line of investigation is whether or not rape victims who developed PTSD had different premorbid personality characteristics or a different pattern of adjustment that may have contributed to developing PTSD. Some evidence suggests a relationship between depression prior to the crime, the level of stress associated with the crime (e.g., an attack with life threat, actual injury, or completed rape), and the probability of developing PTSD. If the victim is depressed before the assault, and if the victim is assaulted in a particularly severe manner, then she is more likely to suffer from PTSD following the crime in comparison to victims of lower stress crimes (Bonanno, Galea, Bucciarelli, & Vlahov, 2007; Ozer & Weiss, 2004). 
     Cognitive factors may also infl uence whether a rape victim will develop PTSD. A perceived life threat may be present even in situations that are not overtly violent. In fact, the severity of perceived life threat, rather than actual life threat, may be the best predictor of whether a person will develop PTSD (Basoglu & Paker, 1995). The person’s beliefs about whether she or he can control future events are also important. Victims who perceive (perhaps with justifi cation) that future negative events are uncontrollable are much more likely to have severe PTSD symptoms than those victims who perceive some future control (Basoglu & Mineka, 1992). This indication is particularly important when viewed in light of the fact that many women who have been raped report that they expect to be raped again. 
     Risk for persistent problems following a traumatic event is also increased by avoidance of emotional feelings and rumination about the traumatic event. Victims who suppress their feelings of anger may have an increased risk of developing PTSD after a rape (Foa & Riggs, 1995). Intense anger may interfere with the modifi cation of the traumatic memory (to make it more congruent with previous feelings of safety). Anger also inhibits fear, so the victim cannot habituate to the fear response. Jocelyn’s ongoing problems with the experience of anger may have helped to prolong her other symptoms of PTSD, such as nightmares and hyperarousal. 
     Protective factors such as the person’s level of social support may help to prevent or limit the development of PTSD and other psychological consequences of rape (Andrews, Brewin, & Rose, 2003; Keane, Fisher, Krinsley, & Niles, 1994). Unfortunately, simply having a social support network may not be enough. The tendency of the victim to withdraw and avoid situations is an inherent part of the disorder. This avoidance may mean that victims do not take advantage of social support, even if it is available to them. In Jocelyn’s case, the reactions of her friends often led to further problems and made her feel less in control and more alienated from other people. This kind of problem may help to explain why some studies do not fi nd that social support serves as a protective factor. 
    T he moderating effects of social support may also be complex. Consider, for example, the evidence regarding traumatic stress responses among survivors of torture (Bas¸ogˇlu et al., 1994). Those victims with extensive social support networks were less likely to be anxious or depressed, but social support did not specifi cally reduce the frequency or severity of PTSD symptoms. This pattern suggests that the needs of trauma survivors must be addressed broadly. In other words, factors that alleviate some of the more general consequences of exposure to trauma may not have a direct impact on the more focal symptoms of PTSD, such as avoidance and numbing, reexperiencing, and increased arousal. 
     Attitudes that society holds toward victims of sexual assault are also important in relation to social support (Ullman & Filipas, 2001). Some people apparently believe that certain women somehow deserved to be raped. These women undoubtedly receive less social support than other victims. People may also be more supportive after hearing the details of an assault that was clearly nonconsensual—one in which the victim violently fought back when attacked by a stranger—than when the circumstances surrounding the assault were more ambiguous (the woman’s protests were verbal and not physical). Myths about rape, especially about acquaintance rape, may decrease the amount of social support received by victims of these crimes. 
    J ocelyn’s case also highlights another frequent consequence of rape trauma. Many victims develop sexual dysfunctions. These problems include decreased motivation for sexual activity, arousal diffi culties, and inhibited orgasm (Gillock, Zayfert, Hegel, & Ferguson, 2005). Their onset is undoubtedly mediated by a complex interaction of emotional responses to the rape, including anxiety, depression, and guilt. They can be exacerbated by interpersonal diffi culties with, and lack of support from, sexual partners, as illustrated by Jocelyn’s boyfriend at the time of her rape. Sexual diffi culties may be an important consideration in planning treatment for some victims of sexual trauma. 
 Treatment 
T he most effective forms of treatment for PTSD involve the use of either cognitive-behavior therapy or antidepressant medication, alone or in combination (Foa, Keane, Friedman, & Cohen, 2009; Forbes et al., 2010). The psychological intervention that has been used and tested most extensively is prolonged exposure. This procedure starts with initial sessions of information gathering. These are followed by several sessions devoted to reliving the rape scene in the client’s imagination. Clients are instructed to relive the assault by imagining it and describing it to the therapist, as many times as possible, during the 60-minute sessions. Sessions are recorded, and patients are instructed to listen to the tape at least once a day. Patients are also required to participate in situations outside the therapy sessions that are deemed to be safe but also elicit fear or avoidance responses. An adapted form of this treatment was used in Jocelyn’s therapy. 
     Cognitive therapy is another effective psychological approach to the treatment of PTSD. It can be used on its own or in combination with prolonged exposure. Perceived threat, more than actual threat, is a better predictor of many of the symptoms of PTSD. Cognitive therapy can address maladaptive ways of perceiving events in the person’s environment. It can also be used to change unrealistic assumptions and beliefs that lead to negative emotions such as guilt. For example, in Jocelyn’s case, her therapist might have used cognitive-therapy procedures to reduce her feelings of guilt about the assault and its consequences (i.e., blaming herself for the rape). Cognitive therapy and prolonged exposure are both effective and approximately equal in their effects on reducing symptoms of PTSD (Bradley, Greene, Russ, Dutra, & Westen, 2005). 
    V arious types of antidepressant medication are also effective forms of treatment for PTSD (Osterman, Erdos, Oldham, & Ivkovic, 2011). Carefully controlled outcome studies indicate that selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, such as sertraline (Zoloft) and paroxetine (Paxil), lead to a reduction in PTSD symptoms for many patients within a period of 6 weeks. In actual practice, cognitivebehavior therapy is often combined with the use of medication. 
 Final Comments 
 We have used the term  victim rather than  survivor to describe a person who experienced a traumatic event. This choice was made primarily because  victim is the term used in the scientifi c literature on PTSD. We also want to point out, however, that many rape victims prefer to think of themselves as survivors to enhance their sense of control over events in their environments. Further information and resources are also available in Robin Warshaw’s book,  I Never Called It Rape (1994). Her descriptions are less technical than this case, and they may provide additional sources of support. 
 Discussion Questions 

1. D iscuss the issues surrounding Jocelyn’s reluctance to report her rape. Should her therapist have reported it to the police without her patient’s consent? Was there a better way for the English professor to handle the situation? 
2. How did Jocelyn’s friends respond to her problems? Did they help the situa-tion or make it worse? Is there anything that they could have done that would have been more benefi cial to her? 
3. D o you think that a person can develop PTSD after witnessing an assault, a bad accident, or some other kind of traumatic event (that happened to someone else)? Or does PTSD only occur in people who are directly the victims of trauma? What kind of evidence would be needed to answer this question empirically? 
4. Do you think that PTSD should be classifi ed as a form of anxiety disorder? 
Should it be included with the dissociative disorders? Why? 
    
     
 CHAPTER  6
 Major Depressive Disorder 
J anet called the mental-health center to ask if someone could help her 5-year-old son, Adam. He had been having trouble sleeping for the past several weeks, and Janet was becoming concerned about his health. Adam refused to go to sleep at his regular bedtime and also woke up at irregular intervals throughout the night. Whenever he woke up, Adam would come downstairs to be with Janet. Her initial reaction had been sympathetic, but as the cycle came to repeat itself night after night, Janet’s tolerance grew thin, and she became more argumentative. She found herself engaged in repeated battles that usually ended when she agreed to let him sleep in her room. Janet felt guilty about giving in to a 5-yearold’s demands, but it seemed like the only way they would ever get any sleep. The family physician was unable to identify a physical explanation for Adam’s problem; he suggested that Janet contact a psychologist. This advice led Janet to inquire about the mental-health center’s series of parent-training groups. 
     Applicants for the groups were routinely screened during an individual intake interview. The therapist began by asking several questions about Janet and her family. Janet was 30 years old and had been divorced from her husband, David, for a little more than a year. Adam was the youngest of Janet’s three children; Jennifer was 10, and Claire was 8. Janet had resumed her college education on a part-time basis when Adam was 2 years old. She had hoped to fi nish her bachelor’s degree at the end of the next semester and enter law school in the fall. Unfortunately, she had withdrawn from classes 1 month prior to her appointment at the mental-health center. Her current plans were indefi nite. She spent almost all of her time at home with Adam. 
    J anet and the children lived in a large, comfortable house that she had received as part of her divorce settlement. Finances were a major concern to Janet, but she managed to make ends meet through the combination of student loans, a grant-in-aid from the university, and child-support payments from David. David lived in a nearby town with a younger woman whom he had married shortly after the divorce. He visited Janet and the children once or twice every month and took the children to spend weekends with him once a month. 
87
     Having collected the necessary background information, the therapist asked for a description of Adam’s sleep diffi culties. This discussion covered the sequence of a typical evening’s events. It was clear during this discussion that Janet felt completely overwhelmed. At several points during the interview, Janet was on the verge of tears. Her eyes were watery, and her voice broke as they discussed her response to David’s occasional visits. The therapist, therefore, suggested that they put off a further analysis of Adam’s problems and spend some time discussing Janet’s situation in a broader perspective. 
    J anet’s mood had been depressed since her husband had asked for a divorce. She felt sad, discouraged, and lonely. This feeling had become even more severe just prior to her withdrawal from classes at the university (1 year after David’s departure). When David left, she remembered feeling “down in the dumps,” but she could usually cheer herself up by playing with the children or going for a walk. Now she was nearing desperation. She cried frequently and for long periods of time. Nothing seemed to cheer her up. She had lost interest in her friends, and the children seemed to be more of a burden than ever. Her depression was somewhat worse in the morning, when it seemed that she would never be able to make it through the day. 
    J anet was preoccupied with her divorce from David and spent hours each day brooding about the events that led to their separation. These worries interfered considerably with her ability to concentrate and seemed directly related to her withdrawal from the university. She had been totally unable to study assigned readings or concentrate on lectures. Withdrawing from school precipitated further problems. She was no longer eligible for student aid and would have to begin paying back her loans within a few months. In short, one problem led to another, and her attitude became increasingly pessimistic. 
    J anet blamed herself for the divorce, although she also harbored considerable resentment toward David and his new wife. She believed that her return to school had placed additional strain on an already problematic relationship, and she wondered whether she had acted selfi shly. The therapist noted that Janet’s reasoning about her marriage often seemed vague and illogical. She argued that she had been a poor marital partner and cited several examples of her own misconduct. These included events and circumstances that struck the therapist as being very common and perhaps expected differences between men and women. For example, Janet spent more money than he did on clothes, did not share his enthusiasm for sports, and frequently tried to engage David in discussions about his personal habits that annoyed her and the imperfections of their relationship. Of course, one could easily argue that David had not been suffi ciently concerned about his own appearance (spending too little effort on his own wardrobe), that he had been too preoccupied with sports, and that he had avoided her sincere efforts to work on their marital diffi culties. But Janet blamed herself. Rather than viewing these things as simple differences in their interests and personalities, Janet saw them as evidence of her own failures. She blew these matters totally out of proportion until they appeared to her to be terrible sins. Janet also generalized from her marriage to other relationships in her life. If her fi rst marriage had failed, how could she ever expect to develop a satisfactory relationship with another man? Furthermore, Janet had begun to question her value as a friend and parent. The collapse of her marriage seemed to affect the manner in which she viewed all of her social relationships. 
    T he future looked bleak from her current perspective, but she had not given up all hope. Her interest in solving Adam’s problem, for example, was an encouraging sign. Although she was not optimistic about the chances of success, she was willing to try to become a more effective parent. 
 Social History 

J anet was reserved socially when she was a child. She tended to have one or two special friends with whom she spent much of her time outside of school, but she felt awkward and self-conscious in larger groups of children. This friendship pattern persisted throughout high school. She was interested in boys and dated intermittently until her junior year in high school, when she began to date one boy on a regular basis. She and her boyfriend spent all of their time together. Janet remembered that the other kids teased them about acting as if they were married. Unfortunately, she and her boyfriend broke up during Janet’s fi rst year in college. 
    J anet met David a few weeks afterward, and they were married the following summer. Janet later wondered whether she had rushed into her relationship with David primarily to avoid the vacuum created by her previous boyfriend’s sudden exit. Whatever her motivation might have been, her marriage was followed shortly by her fi rst pregnancy, which precipitated her withdrawal from the university. For the next seven years, Janet was occupied as a full-time mother and homemaker. 
    W hen Adam was 2 years old and able to attend a day-care center, Janet decided to resume her college education. Her relationship with David became increasingly strained. They had even less time than usual to spend with each other. David resented his increased household responsibilities. Janet was no longer able to prepare meals for the family every night of the week, so David had to learn to cook. He also had to share the cleaning and drive the children to many of their lessons and social activities. A more balanced and stable relationship would have been able to withstand the stress associated with these changes, but Janet and David were unable to adjust. Instead of working to improve their communications, they bickered continuously. The fi nal blow came when David met another woman to whom he was attracted and who offered him an alternative to the escalating hostility with Janet. He asked for a divorce and moved to an apartment. 
    J anet was shaken by David’s departure, despite the fact that they had not been happy together. Fortunately, she did have a few friends to whom she could turn for support. The most important one was a neighbor who had children of approximately the same ages as Janet’s daughters. There were also two couples with whom she and David had socialized. They were all helpful for the fi rst few weeks, but she quickly lost contact with the couples. It was awkward to get together as a threesome, and Janet had never been close enough with the women to preserve their relationships on an individual basis. That left the neighbor as her sole adviser and confi dante, the only person with whom Janet felt she could discuss her feelings openly. 
    F or the next few months, Janet was able to continue her studies. With the children’s help, she managed the household chores and kept up with her work. She even found time for some brief social activities. She agreed to go out on two blind dates arranged by people with whom she and David had been friends. These were generally unpleasant encounters; one of her dates was boring and unattractive, and the other was obnoxiously aggressive. After the latter experience, she discontinued the minimal efforts she had made to develop new friendships. 
     As time wore on, Janet found herself brooding more and more about the divorce. She was gaining weight, and the children began to comment on her appearance. To make matters worse, Claire became sick just prior to Janet’s midterm exams. The added worry of Claire’s health and her concern about missed classes and lost studying time contributed substantially to a decline in Janet’s mood. She fi nally realized that she would have to withdraw from her classes to avoid receiving failing grades. 
     By this point, 1 month prior to her appointment at the mental-health center, she had lost interest in most of her previous activities. Even casual reading had come to be a tedious chore. She did not have any hobbies because she never had enough time. She also found that her best friend, the neighbor, was becoming markedly aloof. When Janet called, she seldom talked for more than a few minutes before fi nding an excuse to hang up. Their contacts gradually diminished to an occasional wave across the street or a quick, polite conversation when they picked up their children from school. It seemed that her friend had grown tired of Janet’s company. 
     This was Janet’s situation when she contacted the mental-health center. Her mood was depressed and anxious. She was preoccupied with fi nancial concerns and her lack of social relationships. Adam’s sleeping problem, which had begun about a week after she withdrew from her classes, was the last straw. She felt that she could no longer control her diffi cult situation and recognized that she needed help. 
 Conceptualization and Treatment 

T he therapist and Janet discussed her overall situation and agreed that Adam was only a small part of the problem. They decided to work together on an individual basis instead of having Janet join the parent-training group. 
    J anet’s depression was clearly precipitated by her divorce, which had a drastic impact on many areas of her life. Increased fi nancial burdens were clearly part of this picture, but interpersonal relationships were even more meaningful. Although the marriage had been far from ideal in terms of meeting Janet’s needs, her relationship with David had been one important part of the way in which Janet thought about herself. She had lost one of her most important roles (as a wife). The therapist believed that an enduring improvement in her mood would depend on her success in developing new relationships and expanded roles for herself. And she would eventually need to learn parenting skills that would allow her to perform her maternal role more successfully. In other words, the therapist adopted a problem-solving approach to Janet’s situation. He was particularly concerned about the passive and ruminative way in which she had begun to respond to the circumstances in her life. The therapist decided to encourage her to engage more actively with her environment while also teaching her to perform specifi c behaviors more effectively. 
     As an initial step, the therapist asked Janet to list all the activities that she enjoyed. He wanted to shift attention away from the unpleasant factors with which Janet was currently preoccupied. Most of the activities Janet mentioned were things that she had not done for several months or years. For example, prior to her return to school, her favorite pastime had been riding horses. She said that she would like to begin riding again, but she felt that it was prohibitively expensive and time consuming. With considerable prodding from the therapist, Janet also listed a few other activities. These included talking with a friend over a cup of coffee, listening to music late at night after the children were asleep, and going for walks in the woods behind her home. In some cases, Janet indicated that these activities used to be pleasant, but she did not think that they would be enjoyable at the present time. 
     Despite Janet’s ambivalence, the therapist encouraged her to pick one activity that she would try at least twice before their next meeting. A short walk in the woods seemed like the most practical alternative, considering that Adam might interrupt listening to music and she did not want to call Susan. The therapist also asked Janet to call the campus riding club to inquire about their activities. 
     At the same time that the therapist encouraged Janet to increase her activity level, he also began to concentrate on an assessment of her interactions with other people. For several sessions, they covered topics such as selecting situations in which Janet might be likely to meet people with whom she would be interested in developing a friendship, initiating a conversation, maintaining a conversation by asking the other person a series of consecutive questions, and other elementary issues. Having identifi ed areas that were problematic for Janet, they discussed solutions and actually practiced, or role-played, various social interactions. 
     During the fi rst few weeks of treatment, Janet’s mood seemed to be improving. Perhaps most important was her luck in fi nding a part-time job at a local riding stable. She learned of the opening when she called to ask about the campus riding club. They were looking for someone who would feed and exercise the horses every morning. The wages were low, but she was allowed to ride as long as she wanted each day without charge. Furthermore, the schedule allowed her to fi nish before the girls returned from school. The money also helped her return Adam to the day-care center on a part-time basis. Janet still felt depressed when she was at home, but she loved to ride, and it helped to know that she would go to work in the morning. 
     An unfortunate sequence of events led to a serious setback shortly after it seemed that Janet’s mood was beginning to improve. Her fi nancial aid had been discontinued, and she could no longer cover her monthly mortgage payments. Within several weeks, she received a notice from the bank threatening to foreclose her mortgage and sell her house. Her appearance was noticeably changed when she arrived for her next appointment. She was apathetic and lethargic. She cried through most of the session, and her outlook had grown distinctly more pessimistic. The therapist was particularly alarmed by an incident that Janet described as happening the previous day. She had been fi lling her car with gas when a mechanic at the service station mentioned that her muffl er sounded like it was cracked. He told her that she should get it fi xed right away because of the dangerous exhaust fumes. In his words, “that’s a good way to kill yourself.” The thought of suicide had not occurred to Janet prior to this comment, but she found that she could not get it out of her mind. She was frightened by the idea and tried to distract herself by watching television. The thoughts continued to intrude despite these efforts. 
    T he therapist immediately discussed several changes in the treatment plan with Janet. He arranged for her to consult a psychiatrist, who prescribed fl uoxetine (Prozac), an antidepressant drug. She also agreed to increase the frequency of her appointments at the clinic to three times a week. These changes were primarily motivated by the onset of suicidal ideation. More drastic action, such as hospitalization or calling relatives for additional support, did not seem to be necessary because her thoughts were not particularly lethal. For example, she said that she did not want to die, even though she was thinking quite a lot about death. The idea frightened her, and she did not have a specifi c plan arranged by which she would accomplish her own death. Nevertheless, the obvious deterioration in her condition warranted a more intense treatment program. 
    T he next month proved to be a diffi cult one for Janet, but she was able to persevere. Three weeks after she began taking the medication, her mood seemed to brighten. The suicidal ideation disappeared, she became more talkative, and she resumed most of her normal activities. The people who owned the riding stable were understanding and held Janet’s new job for her until she was able to return. The fi nancial crisis was solved, at least temporarily, when her father agreed to provide her with substantial assistance. In fact, he expressed surprise and some dismay that she had never asked him for help in the past or even told him that she was in fi nancial trouble. The problem-solving and social skills program progressed well after Janet began taking medication. Within several weeks, she was able to reestablish her friendship with Susan. She was able to meet a few people at the riding stable, and her social network seemed to be widening. 
    A fter Janet’s mood had improved, the issue of Adam’s sleeping problem was addressed. The therapist explained that Janet needed to set fi rm limits on Adam’s manipulative behavior. Her inconsistency in dealing with his demands, coupled with the attention that he received during the bedtime scene, could be thought of as leading to intermittent reinforcement of his inappropriate behavior. Janet and the therapist worked out a simple set of responses that she would follow whenever he got up and came downstairs. She would offer him a drink, take him back to his room, tuck him in bed, and leave immediately. Ten days after the procedure was implemented, Adam began sleeping through the night without interruption. This rapid success enhanced Janet’s sense of control over her situation. Her enthusiasm led her to enroll in the parent-training program for which she had originally applied. She continued to improve her relationship with her children. 
     Janet’s individual therapy sessions were discontinued 9 months after her fi rst appointment. At that point, she was planning to return to school, was still working part time at the riding stable, and had started to date one of the men she met at work. Her children were all healthy, and she had managed to keep their house. She continued to take antidepressant medication. 
 Discussion 

A  sad or dysphoric mood is obviously the most prominent feature of clinical depression. Depressed patients describe themselves as feeling discouraged, hopeless, and apathetic. This dejected emotional state is usually accompanied by a variety of unpleasant thoughts that may include suicidal ideation. These cognitive features of depression are sometimes called  the depressive triad:  a negative view of the self, the world, and the future. Depressed people see themselves as inadequate and unworthy. They are often fi lled with guilt and remorse over apparently ordinary and trivial events. These patients hold a similarly dim view of their environment. Everyday experiences and social interactions are interpreted in the most critical fashion. The future seems bleak and empty. In fact, some extremely depressed patients fi nd it impossible to imagine any future at all. 
    C linical depression is identifi ed by changes in several important areas in the person’s life. In addition to a prominent and relatively persistent dysphoric mood,  DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000, p. 356) lists several features for major depressive episodes. Specifi cally, at least fi ve of the following symptoms must have been present nearly every day for at least 2 weeks if the patient is to meet the criteria for this diagnostic category:
1. Depressed mood most of the day 
2. Markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities most of the day 
3. Signifi cant weight loss (when not dieting) or weight gain, or decrease or increase in appetite 
4. Insomnia or hypersomnia (prolonged sleep) 
5. Psychomotor agitation or retardation 
6. Fatigue or loss of energy 
7. Feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt (not merely self-reproach or guilt about being sick) 
8. Diminished ability to think or concentrate, or indecisiveness 
9. Recurrent thoughts of death (not just fear of dying), recurrent suicidal idea-tion without a specifi c plan, or a suicide attempt or a specifi c plan for committing suicide 
    J anet clearly fi t these criteria. Her mood had been markedly depressed since her separation from David. She had gained considerable weight—25 pounds in 9 months. Her concentration was severely impaired, as evidenced by her inability to study and her loss of interest in almost everything. Excessive and inappropriate guilt was clearly a prominent feature of her constant brooding about the divorce. Although she did not actually attempt to harm herself, she experienced a distressing period of ruminative suicidal ideation. Sleep impairment may also have been a problem, but it was diffi cult to evaluate in the context of Adam’s behavior. Prior to her fi rst visit at the clinic, Janet had been sleeping less than her usual number of hours per night, and she reported considerable fatigue. It was diffi cult to know whether she would have been able to sleep if Adam had not been so demanding of her attention throughout the night. 
    M ost therapists agree that it is important to recognize the difference between clinical depression and other states of unhappiness and disappointment. Consider, for example, people who are mourning the loss of a friend or relative. DSM-IV-TR  (APA, 2000) suggests that a diagnosis of a major depressive episode should be made only if bereavement persists for more than 2 months (assuming that the person meets the diagnostic criteria for this condition). Is this a qualitative or a quantitative distinction? Are patients who might be considered clinically depressed simply more unhappy than their peers, or are these phenomena completely distinct? This is one of the most interesting and diffi cult questions facing investigators in the fi eld of mood disorders. The present diagnostic system handles the problem by including an intermediate category, dysthymia, which lies between major depressive disorder and normal mood. This category includes patients who exhibit chronic depressed symptoms that are not of suffi cient severity to meet the criteria for major mood disorder. 
 Etiological Considerations 
  S everal psychological models have been proposed to account for the develop-ment of major depression. Each model focuses on somewhat different features of depressive disorders (e.g., interpersonal relations, inactivity, or self-deprecating thoughts), but most share an interest in the role of negative or stressful events in the precipitation of major depression. 
     Freud’s explanation for the development of depression began with a comparison between depression and bereavement (Freud, 1917, 1925). The two conditions are similar. Both involve a dejected mood, a loss of interest in the outside world, and an inhibition of activity. One principal feature distinguishes between the person who is depressed and the person who is mourning: a disturbance of self-regard. Depressed people chastise themselves, saying that they are worthless, morally depraved, and worthy of punishment. Freud noted the disparity between such extreme negative views and the more benign opinions of other people who do not hold the depressed person in such contempt. In other words, the depressed person’s view does not seem to be an accurate self-perception. Freud went on to argue that depressed people are not really complaining about themselves but are, in fact, expressing hostile feelings that pertain to someone else. Depression is therefore the manifestation of a process in which anger is turned inward and directed against the self instead of against its original object. 
    W hy would some people direct hostility against themselves? Freud argued that the foundation for this problem is laid in early childhood. For various reasons, people who are prone to depression have formed dependent interpersonal relationships. This dependency fosters frustration and hostility. Because these negative feelings might threaten the relationship if they are expressed openly, they are denied awareness. Problems then arise when the relationship is ended, for whatever reason. The depressed person’s ego presumably identifi es with the lost loved one. The intense hostility that had been felt for that person is now turned against the self, or introjected. Following this model, treatment would consist of an attempt to make the client aware of these unconscious, hostile impulses. Their more direct expression would presumably eliminate the depression. 
    A t least one aspect of this model seems consistent with Janet’s situation. She had, in fact, formed a series of intense, dependent relationships with men, beginning in high school. One might argue that her depression was precipitated by the loss incurred during her separation and divorce from David. She resented the separation deeply. Her guilt might be seen as a criticism of David’s behavior. Other aspects of Janet’s behavior, however, are inconsistent with Freud’s model. Although Janet was critical of herself, she was also quite vocal in David’s presence. They fought openly several times, both before and after the divorce, and he was fully aware of Janet’s anger and resentment. It therefore seems unlikely that Janet’s depression was a simple manifestation of misdirected hostility. It is also unlikely that her depression would be relieved by simply encouraging her to express her feelings more openly. 
     More recent attempts to explain the development of depression in psychological terms have borrowed and extended various aspects of Freud’s psychoanalytic model. One important consideration involves his observation that the onset of depression is often preceded by a dependent personality style and then precipitated by the loss of an important relationship. Personality factors and relational distress may help to explain the fact that women are twice as likely as men to develop major depression. Dependent people base their self-esteem on acceptance and approval by others. Some authors have suggested that, throughout their social development, women are frequently taught to think this way about themselves (Crick & Zahn-Waxler, 2003; Gilligan, 1982). Stereotypes of female roles include descriptions of personality traits such as being passive, dependent, and emotional (whereas men are presumably more often encouraged to be aggressive, autonomous, and rational). An extension of this hypothesis holds that women are more likely than men to defi ne themselves in terms of their relationships with other people. Women would then presumably be more distressed by marital diffi culties and divorce. In Janet’s case, the loss of her relationship with David was certainly an important consideration in the onset of her depression. Her sense of self-worth was severely threatened by the divorce, despite the fact that her marriage had been far from ideal. 
     Stressful life events play a causal role in the etiology of depression (Harkness et al., 2010; Monroe & Harkness, 2005). One classic study has received considerable attention because it led to the development of a model that begins to explain the relationship between environmental conditions and the onset of depression. Brown and Harris (1978) found an increased incidence of stressful events in the lives of depressed women but only with regard to a particular subset of such events—those that were severe and involved long-term consequences for the woman’s well-being. Divorce and marital separation were prominent among these events, which also included events such as illness, loss of a job, and many other types of personal adversity. The impact of a stressful event apparently depends on the meaning that the event has for the person. Severe events that occur in the context of ongoing diffi culties (such as a chronically distressed marriage) and events that occur in areas of a woman’s life to which she is particularly committed (such as a child’s health or the development of a career) are most likely to lead to the onset of depression (Brown, 2002). 
  T he association between stressful life events and depression is apparently bidirectional. Stress may cause depression, but depression also causes stress. In comparison to women who are not depressed and women with medical disorders, depressed women generate higher levels of stress, especially in interpersonal relationships such as marriage (Hammen, 2005). This result indicates the operation of a dynamic process. Stressors that are not related to the person’s own behavior may precipitate the onset of a depressed mood. The depressed person may then engage in maladaptive ways of coping with the immediate situation, and these dysfunctional behaviors may lead to even higher levels of stress. 
     Several of these concepts are consistent with Janet’s situation. She had clearly experienced a high level of stress in the months before she entered therapy. The divorce from David is one obvious example. Her diffi culties with the children may be another instance. When Claire’s illness eventually forced her to withdraw from the university, there were important long-term consequences for her graduation and subsequent plans to enter law school. 
    S tressful life events are likely to precipitate depression, particularly in the absence of adequate social support. The manner in which these experiences combine to take their effect, however, is currently a matter of dispute and speculation. It is important to remember that most people experience stressful events at one time or another, but most people do not become seriously depressed. What factors make some people more psychologically vulnerable? Do people who are prone to depression respond differently than others to the problems of everyday life? Are they less likely than other people to establish or maintain a protective social support network? These questions have been addressed by other etiological models. 
    S ocial-learning theorists (Joiner, Coyne, & Blalock, 1999) also emphasize the importance of interpersonal relationships and social skills (cf. narcissism and dependence) in the onset and maintenance of depression. This model provides an interesting account of the way in which depressed people respond to stressful life events and the effect that these responses have on other people. Others respond empathically and are initially attentive when the depressed person talks about depressing experiences, yet, the long-range result of this process is usually negative. The depressed person’s few remaining friends eventually become tired of this behavior and begin to avoid further interactions. Whatever sources of social support may have been available are eventually driven away. One important factor in this regard is a defi cit in social skills. Depressed people may be ineffective in their interactions with other people. An important aspect of treatment would therefore be to identify specifi c skills in which the person is defi cient and to teach the person more effective ways of interacting with others. 
    S everal aspects of this model are consistent with the present case. After her separation from David, Janet had become isolated. Her long discussions with her neighbor had eventually soured their relationship and eliminated one of her last sources of social support. When Janet and her therapist discussed things that she might do to meet new friends, she seemed lost. The few attempts that she had made, such as her blind dates, had gone badly, and she did not know where else to begin. 
     Another consideration in social-learning views of depression involves the way in which people respond to the onset of a depressed mood. Some people try to distract themselves from negative emotions by becoming involved in some activity. Others respond in a more passive fashion and tend to ruminate about the sources of their distress. Nolen-Hoeksema (2002) proposed that people who respond in a passive, ruminative way experience longer and more severe periods of depression. She also suggested that this factor may account for gender differences in the prevalence of depression because women are more likely than men to employ this response style. Janet’s behavior following her divorce fi ts nicely with Nolen-Hoeksema’s conceptual framework. Although Janet initially tried to cope actively with her various problems, she soon relinquished most of her efforts to fi nd new friends or to keep up with her studies. She frequently found herself brooding about the divorce and the hopeless nature of her circumstances. Her therapist encouraged Janet to engage more frequently in pleasant activities in an effort to break this cycle of passive, ruminative behavior. 
     In addition to the social and behavioral aspects of depression, it is also important to consider the way in which depressed people perceive or interpret events in their environment. What do they think about themselves and things that happen in their world? More specifi cally, how do they explain the experience of negative events? Cognitive perspectives suggest that patterns of thinking and perception play a prominent role in the development of depression (Gotlib & Joormann, 2010; Mathews & MacLeod, 2005). According to one infl uential theory, the occurrence of negative life events may lead to the development of hopelessness, which in turn causes the onset of symptoms of depression (Alloy, Abramson, Walshaw, & Neeren, 2006). Two cognitive elements defi ne the state of hopelessness: (a) the expectation that highly desired outcomes will not occur or that highly aversive outcomes will occur, and (b) the belief that the person cannot do anything (is helpless) to change the likelihood that these events will occur. 
     Why do some people become hopeless after negative experiences whereas others do not? The theory holds that the likelihood of developing hopelessness will depend on the person’s inferences regarding three factors: the cause of the event, the consequences of the event, and the implications of the event with regard to the self. For example, hopeless depression is likely to occur if the person views a negative event as being important and also attributes the event to factors that are enduring (stable) and likely to affect many outcomes (global). The theory also recognizes that the perceived consequences of the negative event may be as important as inferred causes. If the person views the negative consequences of the event as important, persistent, and wide ranging, depression will be more likely to develop than if the consequences are viewed as unimportant, short lived, or limited in scope. The third and fi nal consideration involves negative inferences about the self. Depression is a more likely outcome if the person interprets a negative event to mean that she or he is a less able, worthy, or desirable person. 
    D epressed people do express an inordinately high proportion of negative statements about themselves and how they relate to the world. Janet’s interpretation of the events leading up to and surrounding her divorce fi t with the hopelessness theory. She believed that the disintegration of her marriage was her own fault rather than David’s; she argued that her failure in that relationship was characteristic of her interactions with all other men rather than specifi c to one person; and she maintained that she would never be able to change this pattern of behavior. 
 Treatment 
 Janet’s treatment involved a combination of psychotherapy and antidepressant medication. Following the social learning/interpersonal model, her therapist focused on increasing Janet’s activity level and helping her learn new social skills. By encouraging activities such as riding, the therapist hoped to interrupt and reverse the ongoing, interactive process in which social isolation, rumination, and inactivity led to increased depression, depression led to further withdrawal, and so on. Through the development of new response patterns, particularly those involving interpersonal communication and parenting skills, he hoped to enable Janet to deal more effectively with future stressful events. Increased social activity and more effective communication would also lead to a more supportive social network that might help reduce the impact of stressful events. Recent evidence suggests that behavioral activation—increasing pleasant activities and positive interactions with others—is one effective approach to the treatment of depression (Lejuez, Hopko, Acierno, Daughters, & Pagoto, 2011; Mazzuccelli, Kane, & Rees, 2009). 
     The therapy that Janet received was, in many respects, similar to another psychological approach to treating depression that is known as  interpersonal psychotherapy,  or IPT (Mufson et al., 2004; Weissman, 2007). The focus of IPT is the connection between depressive symptoms and current interpersonal problems. Relatively little attention is paid to long-standing personality problems or developmental issues. The treatment takes a practical, problem-solving approach to resolving the sorts of daily confl icts in close relationships that can exacerbate and maintain depression. Defi cits in social skills are addressed in an active and supportive fashion. The depressed person is also encouraged to pursue new activities that might take the place of relationships or occupational roles that have been lost. Therapy sessions often include nondirective discussions of social diffi culties and unexpressed or unacknowledged negative emotions as well as role-playing to practice specifi c social skills. 
    A ntidepressant medication was introduced when the risk of suicide became apparent. Janet’s suicidal ideation was not extremely lethal. She had not planned a particular method by which she might end her life, and she reported that the idea of harming herself was frightening. The risk would have been much greater if she did have more specifi c plans and if she had really wanted to die. Nevertheless, her morbid ruminations marked a clear deterioration in her condition that called for more intensive treatment. Three general classes of drugs are useful in the treatment of depression: selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), tricyclics (TCAs), and monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors. Improvements in the patient’s mood and other specifi c affective symptoms are typically evident after 2 to 4 weeks of drug treatment. Their continued administration also reduces the probability of symptomatic relapse. 
     Janet was given fl uoxetine (Prozac), which is an SSRI. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors were developed in the 1980s and now account for most prescriptions written for antidepressant medication (Hameed, Schwartz, Malhotra, West, & Bertone, 2005; Hirschfeld, 2001). Additional examples of SSRIs include fl uvoxamine (Luvox), sertraline (Zoloft), and paroxetine (Paxil). The SSRIs inhibit the reuptake of serotonin into the presynaptic nerve ending and therefore increase the amount of serotonin available in the synaptic cleft. SSRIs have fewer side effects (such as weight gain, constipation, and drowsiness) than 
    
Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology
TCAs or MAO inhibitors; they are easier to take (one pill a day instead of experimenting for weeks to fi nd the proper dosage); and they are less dangerous if the patient takes an overdose. This does not mean that they are without side effects of their own. Some patients experience nausea, headaches, fatigue, restlessness, and sexual side effects such as diffi culty in reaching orgasm. Controlled outcome studies indicate that Prozac and other SSRIs are at least as effective as traditional forms of antidepressant medication (Kroenke et al., 2001). Medication and psychotherapy are both effective forms of treatment for people who suffer from major depression (Hollon, Thase, & Markowitz, 2002). 
     One obvious disadvantage associated with both medication and psychotherapy is the extended delay involved in achieving therapeutic effects. In the face of a serious suicidal threat, for example, the therapist may not be able to wait several weeks for a change in the patient’s adjustment. Also, many patients do not respond positively to medication or psychosocial treatment approaches. Another form of intervention that may be tried with depressed patients, particularly if they exhibit profound motor retardation and have failed to respond positively to antidepressant medication, is electroconvulsive therapy (ECT). In the standard ECT procedure, a brief seizure is induced by passing an electrical current between two electrodes that have been placed over the patient’s temples. A full course of treatment generally involves the induction of six to eight seizures spaced at 48-hour intervals. The procedure was fi rst introduced as a treatment for schizophrenia, but it soon became apparent that it was most effective with depressed patients. Many studies have supported this conclusion (Husain, Kevan, Linnell, & Scott, 2004). 
    M uch of the controversy surrounding ECT is based on misconceptions concerning the procedure and its effects. Although it is often referred to as “shock therapy,” ECT does not involve the perception of an electrical current. In fact, a short-acting anesthetic is administered prior to the seizure so that the patient is not conscious when the current is applied. Many of the deleterious side effects of ECT have been eliminated by modifi cations in the treatment procedure, such as the use of muscle relaxants to avoid bone fractures during the seizure (Abrams, 2002). The extent and severity of memory loss can be greatly reduced by the use of unilateral electrode placement. If both electrodes are placed over the nondominant hemisphere of the patient’s brain, the patient can experience less verbal memory impairment, but the treatment may be less effective in terms of its antidepressant results. There is, of course, the serious question of permanent changes in brain structure and function. Some critics of ECT have argued that it produces irreversible neurological impairment. Proponents of ECT maintain that the evidence for this conclusion is inadequate (Abrams, 2002). Most of the objections to the use of ECT are based on misconceptions. The evidence supporting its therapeutic effi cacy seems to justify the continued use of ECT with some severely depressed patients who have not responded to less-intrusive forms of treatment. 
 Discussion Questions 

1. Patients who are experiencing serious suicidal thoughts are frequently hospi-talized involuntarily. What are the advantages and disadvantages of forcing people to be hospitalized against their will? 
2. Janet had experienced a series of stressful events and circumstances. Would anyone have become depressed if they were in the same situation? If not, what other factors might have combined with these stressful events to lead to her depression? 
3. F rom the beginning of therapy, the psychologist encouraged Janet to become more actively involved in various pleasant activities. Do you think treatment would have been even more effective if they had initially spent more time discussing at length the sources of her distress (such as her feelings about her divorce)? 
4. I magine that one of your close relatives has been depressed for several years. The person has not responded to previous forms of treatment (both medication and psychotherapy) and is now talking about committing suicide. Would you be willing to authorize a series of ECT for your relative? Why or why not? 

 CHAPTER  7
 Bipolar Disorder 
 By the time he was admitted to the hospital, George Lawler was talking a mile a minute. He harangued the other patients and ward staff, declaring that he was the coach of the U.S. Olympic track team and offering to hold tryouts for the other patients in the hospital. His movements were rapid and somewhat erratic as he paced the halls of the ward and explored every room. At the slightest provocation, he fl ew into a rage. When an attendant blocked his entrance to the nursing station, he threatened to report her to the president of the Olympic committee. He had not slept for 3 nights. His face was covered with a stubbly growth of beard, and his hair was scattered in various directions. His eyes were sunken and bloodshot, but they still gleamed with an intense excitement. 
    H is life had taken a drastic change over the past 2 weeks. George was 35 years old, married, and the father of two young children. He worked at a small junior college where he taught physical education and coached both the men’s and women’s track teams. Until his breakdown, the teams had been having an outstanding season. They were undefeated in dual competition and heavy favorites to win the conference championship. The campus was following their accomplishments closely because it had been many years since one of the school teams had won a championship. In fact, track was the only sport in which the school had a winning record that season. 
     This was not the fi rst time that George had experienced psychological problems. His fi rst serious episode had occurred during his junior year in college. It did not seem to be triggered by any particular incident; in fact, things had been going well. George was playing defensive back on the university football team. He was in good academic standing and fairly popular with the other students. Nevertheless, during the spring semester, George found that he was losing interest in everything. It was not surprising that he did not look forward to classes or studying. He had never been an outstanding student. But he noticed that he no longer enjoyed going out with his friends. They said he seemed depressed all the time. George said he just did not care anymore. He began avoiding his girlfriend, and when they were together, he found fault with almost everything she 
102
    
did. Most of his time was spent in his apartment in front of the television. It did not seem to matter what program he watched because his concentration was seriously impaired. He kept the TV on as a kind of distraction, not as entertainment. When he did not show up for spring football practice, the coach called him to his offi ce for a long talk. George told his coach that he did not have the energy to play football. In fact, he did not feel he could make it through the easiest set of drills. He did not care about the team or about his future in sports. Recognizing that George’s problem was more than a simple lack of motivation, the coach persuaded him to visit a friend of his—a psychiatrist at the student health clinic. George began taking antidepressant medication and attending individual counseling sessions. Within several weeks, he was back to his normal level of functioning, and treatment was discontinued. 
     George had also experienced periods of unusual ambition and energy. As a student, he had frequently spent several days cramming for exams at the end of a semester. Many of his friends took amphetamines to stay awake, but George seemed able to summon endless, internal reserves of energy. In retrospect, these periods seemed to be hypomanic episodes (i.e., periods of increased energy that are not suffi ciently severe to qualify as full-blown mania). At the time, these episodes went relatively unnoticed. George’s temporary tendency toward excess verbosity, his lack of need for sleep, and his ambitious goals did not seem pathological. In fact, his energetic intervals were productive, and his behavioral excesses were probably adaptive in the competitive university environment. 
    T here had been two subsequent episodes of depression with symptoms that were similar to those of the fi rst episode. The most recent incident had occurred 8 months prior to his current hospitalization. It was September, 2 weeks after the start of the fall semester. George had been worried about his job and the team all summer. Who would replace his star sprinter who had transferred to the state university? Would his high jumper get hurt during the football season? Could they improve on last year’s winning record? Over the past month, these concerns had become constant and consuming. George was having trouble getting to sleep; he was also waking up in the middle of the night for no apparent reason. He felt tired all the time. His wife and children noticed that he was always brooding and seemed preoccupied. Then came the bad news. First, the athletic department told him that he would not get an increase in travel funds, which he had expected. Then he learned that one of his assistant coaches was taking a leave of absence to fi nish working on her degree. Neither of these events would have a drastic effect on the upcoming season, but George took them to be disasters. His mood changed from one of tension and anxiety to severe depression. Over several days, George became more and more lethargic until he was almost completely unresponsive. His speech was slow and, when he did say more than a word or two, he spoke in a dull monotone. Refusing to get out of bed, he alternated between long hours of sleep and staring vacuously at the ceiling. He called the athletic director and quit his job, pointing to minor incidents as evidence of his own incompetence. He believed, for example, that the assistant coach had 
104 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology
quit because of a brief argument that he had had with her 6 months earlier. In fact, they had a positive relationship, and she had always planned to return to school at one time or another. She was leaving earlier than she had expected for personal reasons. George seemed to be blaming himself for everything. He apologized profusely to his wife and children for failing them as a husband and father. His despair seemed genuine. Suicide appeared to be the only reasonable solution. He threatened to end it all if his family would only leave him alone. 
     George’s wife, Cheryl, called the psychiatrist who had treated him during his last episode (2 years earlier) and arranged a special appointment. The psychiatrist decided to prescribe lithium carbonate, a drug that is used to treat manic episodes but that is also an effective antidepressant with bipolar patients (those who show both manic and depressed phases of disturbance). Although George had never been hospitalized for a manic episode, the psychiatrist suggested that his past history of “maniclike” behavior (increased energy, sleeplessness, infl ated self-esteem, and so on) and his positive family history for bipolar disorder (his uncle Ralph) were both consistent with the diagnosis of bipolar disorder. The lithium seemed to be effective. Three weeks later, George was back at work. Maintenance doses of lithium were prescribed in an attempt to reduce the frequency and severity of future mood swings. 
    H is fi rst fully developed manic period began suddenly near the end of the next spring track season. The team was having a good year, and a few team members had turned in remarkable individual performances. Two days before the conference meet, Cheryl noticed that George was behaving strangely. There was a driven quality about his preparation for the meet. He was working much longer hours and demanding more from the athletes. When he was home, he talked endlessly about the team, bragging about its chances for national recognition and planning intricate strategies for particularly important events. Cheryl was worried about this change in George’s behavior, but she attributed it to the pressures of his job and assured herself that he would return to normal when the season was over. 
    G eorge was clearly losing control over his own behavior. The following incident, which occurred on the day of the conference meet, illustrates the dramatic quality of his disturbance. While the men’s team was dressing in the locker room prior to taking the fi eld, George paced rapidly up and down the aisles, gesturing emphatically and talking at length about specifi c events and the virtues of winning. When the men were all in uniform, George gathered them around his own locker. Without Cheryl’s knowledge, he had removed a ceremonial sword from their fi replace mantel and brought it with him that morning. He drew the sword from his locker and leaped up on a bench in the midst of the men. Swinging the sword above his head, he began chanting the school’s fi ght song. The athletes joined in, and he led them out onto the fi eld screaming and shaking their fi sts in the air. A reporter for the school newspaper later described the incident as the most inspirational pregame performance he had ever seen in a locker room. Without question, the team was driven to an exceptional emotional peak, and it did go on to win the meet by a huge margin. In fact, George was later given the school’s annual coaching award. His behavior prior to the meet was specifi cally cited as an example of his outstanding leadership qualities. Unfortunately, the action was also another manifestation of psychopathology and a signal of further problems that would soon follow. 
     George did not return home after the meet. He stayed in his offi ce, working straight through the night in preparation for the regional meet. Cheryl was fi nally able to locate him by phoning his friend who worked in the offi ce next door. She and his colleagues tried to persuade him to slow down, but he would not listen. The next morning George was approached by a reporter from the school newspaper. Here, George thought, was the perfect opportunity to expound on his ability as a coach and to publicize his exciting plans for future competition. The interview turned into a grandiose tirade, with George rambling uninterrupted for 3 hours. The reporter could neither interrupt nor extract himself from this unexpected and embarrassing situation. 
     The interview turned into a professional disaster for George. Among other things, George boasted that he was going to send the star high jumper from the women’s team to the NCAA national meet in Oregon. He planned to go along as her chaperone and said that he would pay for their trip out of the proceeds of a recent community fund-raising drive. This announcement was startling in two regards. First, the money in question had been raised with the athletic department’s assurance that it would be used to improve the college’s track facilities and to sponsor running clinics for local children. George did not have the authority to redirect the funds. His announcement was certain to anger the business leaders who had organized the drive. Second, the prospect of a married male coach chaperoning a female athlete, who also happened to be quite attractive, promised to raise a minor scandal in their small, conservative community. Recognizing the sensitive nature of these plans, the reporter asked George if he might want to reconsider his brash announcement. George replied—asking the reporter to quote him—that it was not every year that he had the opportunity to take a free trip with a pretty girl, and he was not about to pass it up. He added that this might blossom into a genuine romance. 
    T he article appeared, along with a picture of George, on the front page of the school paper the next morning. His disheveled appearance and outrageous remarks raised an instant furor in the athletic department and the school administration. The head of the department fi nally located George in his offi ce making a series of long-distance calls. The director demanded an explanation and immediately found himself in the midst of an ear-shattering shouting match. George claimed that he had just been named head coach of the Olympic track team. He was now calling potential assistant coaches and athletes around the country to organize tryouts for the following month. Any interference, he claimed, would be attributed to foreign countries that were reluctant to compete against a team led by a coach with such a distinguished record. 
    T he department head realized that George was not kidding and that he could not reason with him. He returned to his own offi ce and phoned Cheryl. When 
    
she arrived, they were unable to convince George that he needed help. They eventually realized that their only option was to call the police, who then took George to a psychiatric hospital. Following an intake evaluation, George was committed for 3 days of observation. Because he did not recognize the severity of his problems and refused to cooperate with his family and the hospital staff, it was necessary to follow an involuntary commitment procedure. The commitment order was signed by a judge on the following day, after a hospital psychiatrist testifi ed in court that George might be dangerous to himself or others. 
 Social History 

I n most respects, George’s childhood was unremarkable. He grew up in a small, midwestern town where his father taught history and coached the high school football team. He had one older brother and two younger sisters. All of the children were fair-to-average students and very athletic. George loved all sports and excelled at most. When he accepted a football scholarship to the state university, everyone expected him to go on to play professional ball. 
     He was always popular with his peers. They looked to him for leadership, and he seemed to enjoy the role. He and his friends were mischievous but were never serious discipline problems. Although some of his friends began drinking alcohol during high school, George always refused to join them. His father had been a heavy drinker, and he did not want to follow the same path. After several years of problem drinking, George’s father had joined Alcoholics Anonymous and remained sober. Everyone agreed that the change in his behavior was remarkable. 
    G eorge’s uncle (his mother’s brother) had also experienced serious adjustment problems. This uncle was several years older than George’s mother, and the principal incidents occurred before George was born. George was therefore uncertain of the details, but he had been told that his uncle was hospitalized twice following periods of rather wild behavior. A later search of hospital records confi rmed that these had, in fact, been maniclike episodes. Although the uncle had been assigned a diagnosis of “acute schizophrenic reaction,” contemporary diagnostic criteria would certainly have required a diagnosis of bipolar disorder. 
 Conceptualization and Treatment 

W hen George was admitted to the hospital, he was clearly out of control. He was racing in high gear despite the fact that he had not slept for several days. He was nearing a state of physical exhaustion. The psychiatrist immediately prescribed a moderate dosage of haloperidol (Haldol), an antipsychotic drug that is also used to treat schizophrenia. George was supposed to have been taking lithium carbonate prior to the onset of the episode, but a check of his blood-lithium level indicated that he had not been following the prescribed procedure. He was therefore started on a dose of 900 mg of lithium on the fi rst day. This was increased to 1,800 mg per day over the next 2 weeks. The hospital nursing staff took blood tests every third day to ensure that the blood lithium level did not exceed 1.4 milliequivalents per liter—the point at which toxic effects might be expected. After 3 weeks, the Haldol was discontinued, and George continued to receive maintenance doses of lithium (2,100 mg per day). 
    G eorge and Cheryl were, once again, given specifi c instructions pertaining to the potential hazards of taking lithium. The importance of a proper diet, and particularly a normal level of salt intake, was stressed. They were also told about the early warning signs of lithium intoxication (e.g., nausea, gastrointestinal distress, muscular weakness), so that they could warn George’s psychiatrist if the dosage needed to be reduced. 
    I n addition, George was involved in a number of other therapeutic activities. He and the other patients on the ward met daily for sessions of group psychotherapy. There were also several recreational and occupational activities that the patients could choose according to their own interests. Visits by family members and close friends were encouraged during the evening hours. When George’s behavior improved, he was taken off restricted status and allowed to leave the ward for short periods of time. 
    G eorge was discharged from the hospital after 3 weeks. His behavior had improved dramatically. The fi rst few days in the hospital had been diffi cult for everyone concerned. He had been so excited that the entire ward routine had been disrupted. Mealtimes were utterly chaotic, and when the patients were supposed to go to sleep for the night, George shouted and ran around like a child going to his fi rst slumber party. The physical exertion fi nally took its toll. He fell into a state of nearly complete exhaustion. After sleeping for the better part of 3 days, George’s demeanor was somewhat more subdued. He had given up the grandiose notion about Olympic fame and seemed to be in better control of his speech and motor behavior. But he had not returned to normal. He was still given to rambling speeches and continued to fl irt with the female staff members. His mood was unstable, fl uctuating between comical amusement and quick irritation. In contrast to most of the other patients, George was gregarious and energetic. He organized group activities and saw himself as a hospital aide, not as a patient. 
    T hese residual symptoms dissipated gradually over the next 2 weeks. He was switched to voluntary status and now recognized the severity of his previous condition. In retrospect, the events that had struck him as exhilarating and amusing seemed like a nightmare. He said that his thoughts had been racing a mile a minute. He had been totally preoccupied with the conference meet and upcoming events. The locker room incident caused him considerable concern as he admitted the possibility that he could have seriously injured someone with the sword. 
     Following discharge from the hospital, George was kept on a maintenance dosage of lithium. He attended an outpatient clinic regularly for individual psychotherapy, and his blood levels of lithium were carefully monitored. George and Cheryl also began conjoint therapy sessions with a dual purpose in mind. They needed to work on improving their own relationship, and they also wanted to acquire more effective means of interacting with and controlling their children. This aspect of the treatment program was unsuccessful. Cheryl had been seriously embarrassed by George’s behavior during the manic episode. The cruelest blow came with the newspaper article in which George had announced his affection for another woman. That incident seemed to leave an insurmountable wall of tension between George and Cheryl, even though they both made a serious effort to improve their relationship. The therapist noticed an improvement in their interactions during therapy sessions, but they continued to have periodic, heated fi ghts at home. Cheryl fi nally decided that the situation was hopeless, and 6 months after George was discharged from the hospital, she fi led for a divorce. 
     George was, of course, shaken by this development, but he managed to avoid becoming seriously depressed. His friends from work were an important source of social support, particularly during the fi rst weeks after Cheryl and the children moved to another apartment. He also met more frequently with his therapist during this period and continued to take lithium carbonate. 
 Discussion 

M ood disorders are characterized by a serious, prolonged disturbance of the person’s emotional state. These disturbances may take the form of depression or elation. They are accompanied by a host of other problems, including changes in sleep patterns, appetite, and activity level. 
     Several classifi cation systems have been used to subdivide this broad category into more homogeneous groups. The classifi cation system that currently seems most useful and that is represented in  DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000) draws a distinction between bipolar and unipolar mood disorders. In bipolar disorders, the patient experiences periods of extreme elation (and/or irritability) known as manic episodes. These periods usually alternate with periods of normal mood and periods of severe depression to form a kind of unpredictable emotional cycle that some patients liken to a roller-coaster ride. Unipolar patients, on the other hand, experience serious depression without ever swinging to the opposite extreme. George had exhibited manic as well as depressive symptoms, so his problem would be diagnosed as a bipolar disorder. 
    DSM-IV-TR  (APA, 2000, p. 362) lists the following criteria for a manic episode:
1. A distinct period of abnormally and persistently elevated, expansive, or irritable mood lasting at least one week (or any duration if hospitalization is necessary). 
2. D uring the period of mood disturbance, three (or more) of the following symptoms have persisted (four if the mood is only irritable) and have been present to a signifi cant degree:
a. Infl ated self-esteem or grandiosity 
b. Decreased need for sleep, for example, feeling rested after only 3 hours of sleep 
c. More talkative than usual or pressure to keep talking 
d. Flight of ideas or subjective experience that thoughts are racing 
e. D istractibility, for example, attention too easily drawn to unimportant or irrelevant external stimuli 
f. I ncrease in goal-directed activity (either socially, at work or school, or sexually) or psychomotor agitation 
g. Excessive involvement in pleasurable activities that have a high poten-tial for painful consequences; for example, the person engages in unrestrained buying sprees, sexual indiscretions, or foolish business investments 
3. The mood disturbance is suffi ciently severe to cause marked impairment in occupational functioning or in usual social activities or relationships with others, or to necessitate hospitalization to prevent harm to self or others. 
    B ipolar disorders should be distinguished from schizophrenia as well as from unipolar mood disorders. Kraepelin (1919, 1971) recognized that manic and schizophrenic (dementia praecox) patients often exhibit similar symptoms. These include disorganized speech, fl ight of ideas, and delusional thinking. He argued that the difference between the two disorders became apparent on examination of their long-term course. Most patients who fi t Kraepelin’s defi nition of schizophrenia showed a progressive deterioration without periods of recovery. Manic-depressive patients, on the other hand, frequently followed a remitting course. Although they might have repeated episodes of psychotic behavior, their adjustment between episodes was relatively unimpaired. This distinction has continued to be one of the most important considerations in the classifi cation of serious mental disorders (Miklowitz & Johnson, 2006). 
     A less severe form of bipolar disorder is experienced by people who go through episodes of expansive mood and increased energy that are not suffi ciently severe to be considered manic episodes. These are called  hypomanic episodes . According to  DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000), a person who has experienced at least one major depressive episode, at least one hypomanic episode, and no full-blown manic episodes, would be assigned a diagnosis of bipolar II disorder. A hypomanic episode is defi ned in terms of the same symptoms as those that describe a manic episode. The distinction between manic and hypomanic episodes is based on duration and severity. The minimum duration of symptoms for a hypomanic episode is 4 days, as opposed to 1 week for a manic episode. In a hypomanic episode, the mood change must be noticeable to others, but it must not lead to impairment in social or occupational functioning or require hospitalization. If the mood change becomes that severe, it is considered a manic episode. 
    A nother type of mood disorder is known as  cyclothymia,  which is a chronic but less severe form of bipolar disorder. People who meet the criteria for cyclothymia experience several hypomanic episodes and several periods of minor depression during a period of 2 years. They do not, however, experience periods of disturbance that are suffi ciently severe to meet the criteria for major depressive episode or manic episode during the fi rst 2 years of their disturbance. After the initial 2 years of cyclothymia, full-blown episodes of mania or major depression will require that an additional diagnosis, such as bipolar I disorder or bipolar II disorder, be superimposed on the cyclothymic disorder. 
    E stimates of the prevalence of mood disorders in the general population indicate some fairly consistent patterns (Waraich, Goldner, Somers, & Hsu, 2004). In the National Comorbidity Survey Replication (NCS-R) study, lifetime prevalence was 1.0% for bipolar I disorder and 1.1% for bipolar II disorder. In addition to those people who meet defi nite criteria for a bipolar disorder, many people are affected by recurrent episodes of hypomania but do not fully qualify for a formal diagnosis according to  DSM-IV-TR . The lifetime prevalence of subthreshold bipolar disorder was 2.4% in the NCS-R. The lifetime prevalence for major depression was much higher—16.2% overall—than the combined rate for various forms of bipolar disorder (Kessler, Merikangas, & Wang, 2007). Gender differences are not found in the risk for bipolar disorders, but there are important gender differences in the rates of major depression for men and women. Women are roughly twice as likely as men to experience major depression at some point during their lives. 
    T here are also important differences between unipolar and bipolar disorders in terms of both the age of onset and the course of the disorder (Johnson & Kizer, 2002). Bipolar patients tend to be younger than unipolar patients at the time of their fi rst episode of disturbance, usually between the ages of 20 and 30. Bipolar patients also tend to experience a greater number of psychotic episodes during subsequent years. Both unipolar and bipolar mood disorders are associated with substantial impairment in social and occupational functioning. In fact, subthreshold bipolar disorders were associated with as much, if not more, role impairment than was found for major depression in the NCS-R (Kessler et al., 2007). 
     George’s case was typical of the classic picture of manic-depressive illness. He showed an early onset of symptoms and a relatively complete remission between episodes. His behavior was so disruptive during each manic episode that it had long-term, negative consequences for his social and occupational adjustment. He had serious problems with his job, and his marriage ended in divorce. 
 Etiological Considerations 
 The fact that George’s maternal uncle had also experienced manic episodes is consistent with the literature concerning genetic factors in mood disorders. Several family studies have found that the biological relatives of patients with mood disorders are more likely to develop mood disorders than are people in the general population. These data are usually reported in terms of “morbid risk,” or the probability that given individuals will develop the disorder during their lifetime. Several studies have now reported that the relatives of unipolar depressives are at increased risk for unipolar depression but that they are unlikely to exhibit bipolar disorder (McGuffi n et al., 2003). The relatives of bipolar patients, on the other hand, typically demonstrate an increased risk for both unipolar and bipolar disorders. These data have generally been taken to indicate that the bipolar and unipolar subgroups are genetically distinct. George’s positive family history for bipolar disorder thus may be taken as further validation of his bipolar diagnosis and was, in fact, helpful in the decision to try lithium carbonate prior to his fi rst full manic episode. 
     The role of genetic factors in the etiology of mood disorders would be clearer if a specifi c model of genetic action could be identifi ed. Molecular genetic studies have identifi ed linkage to several potential chromosome regions that may contain genes that contribute to the development of bipolar disorder (Farmer, Elkin, & McGuffi n, 2007). Unfortunately, other laboratories have failed to replicate many of the preliminary fi ndings that have been reported over the past few years. What should we make of these inconsistencies? The likely explanation is that mood disorders are genetically heterogeneous (i.e., they are produced by different genes in different people with similar disorders). Further evidence is needed from additional linkage studies, and the next few years will undoubtedly witness exciting reports in this area of research (Lau & Eley, 2010). 
     Although genetic factors play some role in the development of bipolar disorder, they cannot account for it completely. Various experiences throughout the person’s life must also infl uence the onset or expression of psychotic symptoms as well as the course of the disorder (Miklowitz & Johnson, 2009). The generally accepted diathesis-stress model would suggest that bipolar patients inherited some unidentifi ed form of predisposition to the disorder and that the expression of this predisposition then depends on subsequent environmental events. Stressful life events frequently play an important role in the course of the disorder, particularly in triggering relapse (Cohen, Hammen, Henry, & Daley, 2004). 
     In George’s case, it would be reasonable to wonder whether the highly competitive atmosphere associated with college coaching might have triggered the onset of his manic symptoms or his depressive episodes. The weeks preceding his manic episode were busier than usual. His teams had been winning, and the athletic department’s administration seemed to be putting considerable emphasis on the fi nal meets of the season. Viewed from George’s perspective, this amounted to enormous pressure. The job situation was also compounded by his family responsibilities. As he began to spend more and more time with his team, his wife became increasingly discontent and irritable. Her demands, coupled with his coaching responsibilities, placed George in a diffi cult position; he could reduce the amount of time spent planning and supervising workouts, thus increasing the probability that the team would lose, or he could reduce the 
    
112 Case Studies in Abnormal Psychology
amount of time spent with his wife and children, thus increasing the probability that she would ask for a divorce. 
     George’s relationship with his family illustrates the complex interactive nature of mood disorders. Although his marital problems may not have been caused by his mood-disorder symptoms, they certainly made an already diffi cult situation virtually impossible. The marital adjustment of bipolar patients has received considerable attention in the research literature, which indicates that bipolar patients are much more likely than unipolar patients or people in the general population to be divorced (van der Voort, Gossens, & van der Bijl, 2007). The emotional atmosphere within a family is also related to the patient’s social functioning and the course of the disorder. Patients who live in a stressful family environment are much more likely to relapse than patients from families that are characterized by lower levels of interpersonal stress (Miklowitz, 2007). 
    G eorge’s situation was probably typical of the problems experienced by manic patients. Cheryl was forced by his erratic behavior to act as a buffer between George and the community. When he acted strangely at work, his colleagues called her to see if she could explain his behavior. She often found herself making up excuses for him to avoid the unpleasant necessity of disclosing the personal details of his problems. Her efforts were then “rewarded” by his continued excesses. Cheryl gradually came to see herself as a victim. The incident with the undergraduate student was the last straw. George’s behavior was even more diffi cult for Cheryl to understand and accept because of his inconsistency. She argued that if he were always irrational or out of control, she could easily attribute these problems to a psychiatric disorder. However, between episodes, and most of the time, George was a very reasonable, considerate person. Cheryl found it diffi cult to believe that he could change so drastically over such a short period of time. Her fi rst inclination was always to attribute his wild, manic behavior to some malicious intent on his part. When he became depressed, she often blamed herself. Eventually, the problem was simply more than she could handle. 
 Treatment 
 Lithium is the treatment of choice for bipolar disorders. The therapeutic effects of lithium salts were fi rst reported in 1949 by John Cade, an Australian psychiatrist. Cade had been studying the toxic effects of uric acid in guinea pigs and the possibility that the lithium ion might reduce this toxicity. He was not initially interested in behavioral effects, but he happened to notice that guinea pigs that had been injected with lithium carbonate became lethargic and unresponsive to stimuli despite remaining fully conscious. This unexpected fi nding led Cade to wonder whether lithium carbonate might have benefi cial effects for psychotic patients who were extremely excited. He used the drug with a sequence of 10 manic patients and obtained remarkable results. Even chronic patients who had been considered untreatable responded favorably within a period of several days. Furthermore, several patients with schizophrenia who had previously been markedly restless and excited became quiet and amenable. When lithium was discontinued, the patients generally returned to their previous patterns of wild behavior. 
    O ther clinicians soon began to experiment with the use of lithium and met with similar results. Their favorable impression of lithium’s effects were later confi rmed by a number of controlled double-blind studies (Young & Newham, 2006). In fact, lithium can be benefi cial for patients who are depressed as well as for those who are manic. This is particularly true for bipolar patients. Several studies that used double-blind procedures and placebo control groups have concluded that lithium is effective in preventing the recurrence of manic episodes and probably effective in preventing recurrent depression in bipolar patients (Smith, Cornelius, Warnock, Bell, & Young, 2007). 
     Other forms of medication can also be useful in treating bipolar disorders. For example, certain anticonvulsant drugs such as carbamazepine (Tegretol) and valproic acid (Depakote) often lead to improvement in patients who have not responded to lithium. This is an important consideration because about 40% of bipolar patients do not show an adequate clinical response to lithium alone. These are often patients whose moods cycle rapidly (defi ned in  DSM-IV-TR as bipolar patients with four or more separate episodes of depression, mania, or hypomania within 12 months). The anticonvulsants may be used either on their own or in combination with lithium (Nasrallah, Ketter, & Kalali, 2006). 
     George responded favorably to lithium during his brief stay in the hospital, and he returned to his job soon after discharge. It is possible that the episode might have been partially caused by his failure to take the medication regularly. This is a serious problem with all forms of psychopharmacological treatment. It is particularly severe with psychotic patients who characteristically lack insight into the severity of their problem. Every effort is usually made to educate the patient in this regard. The cooperation of family members is often enlisted to assist in the regulation of daily doses. The dangers of lithium also require that patients being treated on an outpatient basis be seen regularly to monitor levels of lithium in the blood. Despite these precautions, many patients fail to follow medication schedules designed to prevent relapse. 
    P sychotherapy is also an important part of treatment for many patients with bipolar disorder (Benyon, Soares-Weiser, Wollacott, Duffy, & Geddes, 2008; Geller & Goldberg, 2007). Used in combination with lithium or other types of medication, psychotherapy can help patients cope with social circumstances that may trigger further episodes. These include family confl ict and stressful life events. Treatment may be aimed at improving the person’s communication skills and problem-solving abilities to strengthen interpersonal relationships (Frank, 2005). Psychological interventions can also be used to increase medication compliance by identifying and addressing patients’ reservations about taking lithium and other drugs. 
 Discussion Questions 

1. Patients with bipolar disorder are often reluctant to take their medication because they don’t want to give up periods of hypomania, when they feel exceptionally upbeat and productive. What would you say to a close friend with bipolar disorder who did not want to take medication? 
2. B ipolar disorder can have a devastating impact on family relationships. Is there anything about the behavior of bipolar patients (especially during a manic episode) that might make it particularly diffi cult for a spouse to understand and accept the person’s behavior as being part of a psychological disorder (rather than simply bad judgment)? 
3. W hat evidence supports the decision to separate unipolar and bipolar mood disorders in the offi cial classifi cation system? In what ways are they different? In what ways are they similar? Can you think of other ways in which the mood disorders might be subdivided into more homogeneous subtypes? 
4. D o you think that people who suffer from bipolar disorder are more likely than other people to seek out and participate in activities and occupations that are particularly stressful? 
        
 CHAPTER  9
 Schizophrenia: Paranoid Type 
 Bill McClary made his fi rst appointment at the mental-health center reluctantly. He was 25 years old, single, and unemployed. His sister, Colleen, with whom he had been living for 18 months, had repeatedly encouraged him to seek professional help. She was concerned about his peculiar behavior and social isolation. He spent most of his time daydreaming, often talked to himself, and occasionally said things that made little sense. Bill acknowledged that he ought to keep more regular hours and assume more responsibility, but he insisted that he did not need psychological treatment. The appointment was fi nally made in an effort to please his sister and mollify her husband, who was worried about Bill’s infl uence on their three young children. 
     During the fi rst interview, Bill spoke quietly and frequently hesitated. The therapist noted that Bill occasionally blinked and shook his head as though he was trying to clear his thoughts or return his concentration to the topic at hand. When the therapist commented on this unusual twitch, Bill apologized politely but denied that it held any signifi cance. He was friendly yet shy and clearly ill at ease. The discussion centered on Bill’s daily activities and his rather unsuccessful efforts to fi t into the routine of Colleen’s family. Bill assured the therapist that his problems would be solved if he could stop daydreaming. He also expressed a desire to become better organized. 
     Bill continued to be guarded throughout the early therapy sessions. After several weeks, he began to discuss his social contacts and mentioned a concern about sexual orientation. Despite his lack of close friends, Bill had had some limited and fl eeting sexual experiences. These had been both heterosexual and homosexual in nature. He was worried about the possible meaning and consequences of his encounters with other males. This topic occupied the next several weeks of therapy. 
     Bill’s “daydreaming” was also pursued in greater detail. It was a source of considerable concern to him, and it interfered signifi cantly with his daily activities. This experience was diffi cult to defi ne. At frequent, though irregular, intervals throughout the day, Bill found himself distracted by intrusive and 
130
repetitive thoughts. The thoughts were simple and most often alien to his own value system. For example, he might suddenly think to himself, “Damn God.” Recognizing the unacceptable nature of the thought, Bill then felt compelled to repeat a sequence of self-statements that he had designed to correct the initial intrusive thought. He called these thoughts and his corrective incantations “scruples.” These self-statements accounted for the observation that Bill frequently mumbled to himself. He also admitted that his unusual blinking and head shaking were associated with the experience of intrusive thoughts. 
     Six months after Bill began attending the clinic regularly, the therapist received a call from Bill’s brother-in-law, Roger. Roger said that he and Bill had recently talked extensively about some of Bill’s unusual ideas, and Roger wanted to know how he should respond. The therapist was, in fact, unaware of any such ideas. Instead of asking Roger to betray Bill’s confi dence any further, the therapist decided to ask Bill about these ideas at their next therapy session. It was only at this point that the therapist fi nally became aware of Bill’s extensive delusional belief system. 
     For reasons that will become obvious, Bill was initially reluctant to talk about the ideas to which his brother-in-law had referred. Nevertheless, he provided the following account of his beliefs and their development. Shortly after moving to his sister’s home, Bill realized that something strange was happening. He noticed that people were taking special interest in him and often felt that they were talking about him behind his back. These puzzling circumstances persisted for several weeks during which Bill became increasingly anxious and suspicious. The pieces of the puzzle fi nally fell in place late one night as Bill sat in front of the television. In a fl ash of insight, Bill suddenly came to believe that a group of conspirators had secretly produced and distributed a documentary fi lm about his homosexual experiences. Several of his high school friends and a few distant relatives had presumably used hidden cameras and microphones to record each of his sexual encounters with other men. Bill believed that the fi lm had grossed over $50 million at the box offi ce and that this money had been sent to the Irish Republican Army to buy arms and ammunition. He therefore held himself responsible for the deaths of dozens of people who had died as the result of several recent bombings in Ireland. This notion struck the therapist and Bill’s brother-in-law as being quite preposterous, but Bill’s conviction was genuine. He was visibly moved as he described his guilt concerning the bombings. He was also afraid that serious consequences would follow his confession. Bill believed that the conspirators had agreed to kill him if he ever found out about the movie. This imagined threat had prevented Bill from confi ding in anyone prior to this time. It was clear that he now feared for his life. 
     Bill’s fear was exacerbated by the voices that he had been hearing for the past several weeks. He frequently heard male voices discussing his sexual behavior and arguing about what action should be taken to punish him. They were not voices of people with whom Bill was personally familiar, but they were always males and they were always talking about Bill. For example, one night when Bill was sitting alone in his bedroom at Colleen’s home, he thought he overheard a conversation in the next room. It was a heated argument in which one voice kept repeating “He’s a goddamned faggot, and we’ve got to kill him!” Two other voices seemed to be asking questions about what he had done and were arguing against the use of such violence. Bill was, of course, terrifi ed by this experience and sat motionless in his room as the debate continued. When Roger tapped on his door to ask if he was all right, Bill was certain that they were coming to take him away. Realizing that it was Roger and that he had not been part of the conversation, Bill asked him who was in the next room. Roger pointed out that two of the children were sleeping in the next room. When Bill went to check, he found the children asleep in their beds. These voices appeared at frequent but unpredictable intervals almost every day. It was not clear whether or not they had fi rst appeared before the development of Bill’s delusional beliefs. 
    T he details of the delusional system were elaborate and represented a complex web of imaginary events and reality. For example, the title of the secret fi lm was supposedly  Honor Thy Father , and Bill said his name in the fi lm was Gay Talese.  Honor Thy Father was, in fact, a popular novel that was written by Gay Talese and published several years prior to the development of Bill’s delusion. The actual novel was about organized crime, but Bill denied any knowledge of this “other book with the same title.” According to Bill’s belief system, the fi lm’s title alluded to Bill’s disrespect for his own father, and his own name in the fi lm was a reference to his reputation as a “gay tease.” He also maintained that his own picture had been on the cover of  Time magazine within the past year with the name Gay Talese printed at the bottom. 
    A n interesting array of evidence was marshaled in support of this delusion. For example, Bill pointed to the fact that he had happened to meet his cousin accidentally on a subway in Brooklyn 2 years earlier. Why, Bill asked, would his cousin have been on the same train if he were not making a secret fi lm about Bill’s private life? In Bill’s mind, the cousin was clearly part of a continuous surveillance that had been carefully arranged by the conspirators. The fact that Bill came from a very large family and that such coincidences were bound to happen did not impress him as a counterargument. Bill also pointed to an incident involving the elevator operator at his mother’s apartment building as further evidence for the existence of the fi lm. He remembered stepping onto the elevator one morning and having the operator give him a puzzled, prolonged glance. The man asked him if they knew each other. Bill replied that they did not. Bill’s explanation for this mundane occurrence was that the man recognized Bill because he had obviously seen the fi lm recently; he insisted that no other explanation made sense. Once again, coincidence was absolutely impossible. His delusional system had become so pervasive and intricately woven that it was no longer open to logical refutation. He was totally preoccupied with the plot and simultaneously so frightened that he did not want to discuss it with anyone. Thus, he had lived in private fear, brooding about the conspiracy and helpless to prevent the conspirators from spreading knowledge of his shameful sexual behavior. 
 Social History 

B ill was the youngest of four children. He grew up in New York City where his father worked as a fi refi ghter. Both of his parents were fi rst-generation Irish Americans. Many of their relatives were still living in Ireland. Both parents came from large families. Bill’s childhood memories were fi lled with stories about the family’s Irish heritage. 
    B ill was always much closer to his mother than to his father, whom he remembered as being harsh and distant. When his parents fought, which they did frequently, Bill often found himself caught in the middle. Neither parent seemed to make a serious effort to improve their relationship. Bill later learned that his father had carried on an extended affair with another woman. His mother depended on her own mother, who lived in the same neighborhood, for advice and support and would frequently take Bill with her to stay at her parents’ apartment after particularly heated arguments. Bill grew to hate his father, but his enmity was tempered by guilt. He had learned that children were supposed to respect their parents and that, in particular, a son should emulate and revere his father. Mr. McClary became gravely ill when Bill was 12 years old, and Bill remembered wishing that his father would die. His wish came true. Years later, Bill looked back on this sequence of events with considerable ambivalence and regret. 
    B ill could not remember having any close friends as a child. Most of his social contacts were with cousins, nephews, and nieces. He did not enjoy their company or the games that other children played. He remembered himself as a clumsy, effeminate child who preferred to be alone or with his mother instead of with other boys. 
     He was a good student and fi nished near the top of his class in high school. His mother and the rest of the family seemed certain that he would go on to college, but Bill could not decide on a course of study. The prospect of selecting a profession struck Bill as an ominous task. How could he be sure that he wanted to do the same thing for the rest of his life? He decided that he needed more time to ponder the matter and took a job as a bank clerk after graduating from high school. 
     Bill moved to a small effi ciency apartment and seemed to perform adequately at the bank. His superiors noted that he was reliable, though somewhat eccentric. He was described as quiet and polite; his reserved manner bordered on being socially withdrawn. He did not associate with any of the other employees and rarely spoke to them beyond the usual exchange of social pleasantries. Although he was not in danger of losing his job, Bill’s chances for advancement were remote. This realization did not perturb Bill because he did not aspire to promotion in the banking profession. It was only a way of forestalling a serious career decision. After 2 years at the bank, Bill resigned. He had decided that the job did not afford him enough time to think about his future. 
     He was soon able to fi nd a position as an elevator operator. Here, he reasoned, was a job that provided time for thought. Over the next several months, he gradually became more aloof and disorganized. He was frequently late to work and seemed unconcerned about the reprimands that he began receiving. Residents at the apartment house described him as peculiar. His appearance was always neat and clean, but he seemed preoccupied most of the time. On occasion he seemed to mumble to himself, and he often forgot fl oor numbers to which he had been directed. These problems continued to mount until he was fi red after working for 1 year at this job. 
     During the fi rst year after fi nishing high school, while working at the bank, Bill had his fi rst sexual experience. A man in his middle forties who often did business at the bank invited Bill to his apartment for a drink, and they became intimate. The experience was moderately enjoyable but primarily anxiety provoking. Bill decided not to see this man again. Over the next 2 years, Bill experienced sexual relationships with a small number of other men as well as with a few women. In each case, it was Bill’s partner who took the initiative. Only one relationship lasted more than a few days. He became friends with a woman named Patty who was about his own age, divorced, and the mother of a 3-yearold daughter. Bill enjoyed being with Patty and her daughter and occasionally spent evenings at their apartment watching television and drinking wine. Despite their occasional sexual encounters, this relationship never developed beyond the casual stage at which it began. 
    A fter he was fi red from the job as an elevator operator, Bill moved back into his mother’s apartment. He later recalled that they made each other anxious. Rarely leaving the apartment, Bill sat around the apartment daydreaming in front of the television. When his mother returned from work, she would clean, cook, and coax him unsuccessfully to enroll in various kinds of job-training programs. His social isolation was a constant cause of concern for her. She was not aware of his bisexual interests and encouraged him to call women that she met at work and through friends. The tension eventually became too great for both of them, and Bill decided to move in with Colleen, her husband, and their three young children. 
 Conceptualization and Treatment 

B ill’s adjustment problems were obviously extensive. He had experienced serious diffi culties in the development of social and occupational roles. From a diagnostic viewpoint, Bill’s initial symptoms pointed to schizotypal personality disorder. In other words, before his delusional beliefs and hallucinations became manifest, he exhibited a series of peculiar characteristics in the absence of fl oridly psychotic symptoms. These included several of the classic signs outlined by Meehl (1964): anhedonia (the inability to experience pleasure), interpersonal aversiveness, and ambivalence. Bill seldom, if ever, had any fun. Even his sexual experiences were described in a detached, intellectual manner. He might indicate, for example, that he had performed well or that his partner seemed satisfi ed, but he never said things like, “It was terrifi c,” or “I was really excited!” He strongly preferred to be alone. When Colleen and Roger had parties, Bill became anxious and withdrew to his room, explaining that he felt ill. 
    B ill’s ambivalence toward other people was evident in his relationship with his therapist. He never missed an appointment; in fact, he was always early and seemed to look forward to the visits. Despite this apparent dependence, he seemed to distrust the therapist and was often guarded in his response to questions. He seemed to want to confi de in the therapist and was simultaneously fearful of the imagined consequences. Bill’s pattern of cognitive distraction was somewhat diffi cult to interpret. His “scruples” were, in some ways, similar to obsessive thoughts, but they also bore a resemblance to one of Schneider’s (1959) fi rst-rank symptoms of schizophrenia—thought insertion. Considering this constellation of problems, it was clear that Bill was in need of treatment, but it was not immediately obvious that he was psychotic. The therapist decided to address Bill’s problems from a cognitive-behavioral perspective. The ambiguity surrounding his cognitive impairment seemed to warrant a delay regarding biological interventions such as medication. 
     The beginning therapy sessions were among the most diffi cult. Bill was tense, reserved, and more than a bit suspicious. Therapy had been his sister’s idea, not his own. The therapist adopted a passive, nondirective manner and concentrated on the diffi cult goal of establishing a trusting relationship with Bill. In the absence of such an atmosphere, it would be impossible to work toward more specifi c behavioral changes. 
    M any of the early sessions were spent discussing Bill’s concerns about homosexuality. The therapist listened to Bill’s thoughts and concerns and shared various bits of information about sexuality and homosexual behavior in particular. As might be expected, Bill was afraid that homosexual behavior per se was a direct manifestation of psychological disturbance. He also wondered about his motivation to perform sexual acts with other men and expressed some vague hypotheses about this being a refl ection of his desire to have a closer relationship with his father. The therapist assured Bill that the gender of one’s sexual partner was less important than the quality of the sexual relationship. In fact, the therapist was most concerned about Bill’s apparent failure to enjoy sexual activity and his inability to establish lasting relationships. Instead of trying to eliminate the possibility of future homosexual encounters or to impose an arbitrary decision based on prevailing sexual norms, the therapist tried to (a) help Bill explore his own concerns about the topic, (b) provide him with information that he did not have, and (c) help him develop skills that would improve his social and sexual relationships, whether they involved men or women. 
    A s their relationship became more secure, the therapist adopted a more active, directive role. Specifi c problems were identifi ed, and an attempt was made to deal with each sequentially. The fi rst area of concern was Bill’s daily schedule. The therapist enlisted Colleen’s support. Together with Bill, they instituted a sequence of contingencies designed to integrate his activities with those of the family. For example, Colleen called Bill once for breakfast at 7:30 a.m. If he missed eating with everyone else, Colleen went on with other activities and did not make him a late brunch as she had done prior to this arrangement. In general, the therapist taught Colleen to reinforce appropriate behavior and to ignore inappropriate behavior as much as possible. Over the initial weeks, Bill did begin to keep more regular hours. 
     After several weeks of work, this home-based program began to produce positive changes. Bill was following a schedule closer to that of the rest of the family and was more helpful around the house. At this point, the therapist decided to address two problems that were somewhat more diffi cult: Bill’s annoying habit of mumbling to himself and his lack of social contacts with peers. Careful interviews with Bill and his sister served as a base for a functional assessment of the self-talk. This behavior seemed to occur most frequently when Bill was alone or thought he was alone. He was usually able to control his scruples in the presence of others; if he was particularly disturbed by a distracting thought, he most often excused himself and retired to his room. Colleen’s response was usually to remind Bill that he was mumbling and occasionally to scold him if he was talking loudly. Given the functional value of Bill’s scruples in reducing his anxiety about irreverent thoughts, it seemed unlikely that the self-talk was being maintained by this social reinforcement. 
    T he therapist decided to try a stimulus-control procedure. Bill was instructed to select one place in the house in which he could daydream and talk to himself. Whenever he felt the urge to daydream or repeat his scruples, he was to go to this specifi c spot before engaging in these behaviors. It was hoped that this procedure would severely restrict the environmental stimuli that were associated with these asocial behaviors and thereby reduce their frequency. Bill and the therapist selected the laundry room as his daydreaming room because it was relatively secluded from the rest of the house. His bedroom was ruled out because the therapist did not want it to become a stimulus for behaviors that would interfere with sleeping. Colleen was encouraged to prompt Bill whenever she noticed him engaging in self-talk outside of the laundry room. The program seemed to have modest, positive results, but it did not eliminate self-talk entirely. 
    I nterpersonal behaviors were also addressed from a behavioral perspective. Since moving to his sister’s home, Bill had not met any people his own age and had discontinued seeing his friends in New York City. Several avenues were pursued. He was encouraged to call his old friends and, in particular, to renew his friendship with Patty. The therapist spent several sessions with Bill rehearsing telephone calls and practicing conversations that might take place. Although Bill was generally aware of what things he should say, he was anxious about social contacts. This form of behavioral rehearsal was seen as a way of exposing him gradually to the anxiety-provoking stimuli. He was also given weekly homework assignments involving social contacts at home. The therapist discussed possible sources of friends, including a tavern not far from Colleen’s home and occasional parties that Colleen and Roger had for their friends. This aspect of the treatment program was modestly effective. Bill called Patty several times and arranged to stay with his mother for a weekend so that he could visit with Patty and her daughter. Although he was somewhat anxious at fi rst, the visit was successful and seemed to lift Bill’s spirits. He was more animated during the following therapy session and seemed almost optimistic about changing his current situation. 
     It was during one of their visits to the neighborhood tavern that Bill fi rst mentioned the imagined movie to Roger. When the therapist learned of these ideas, and the auditory hallucinations, he modifi ed the treatment plan. He had initially rejected the idea of antipsychotic medication because there was no clear-cut evidence of schizophrenia. Now that psychotic symptoms had appeared, an appointment was arranged with a psychiatrist who agreed with the diagnosis and prescribed risperidone (Risperdal), one of the atypical (or “second-generation”) antipsychotic drugs. Because Bill’s behavior was not considered dangerous and his sister was able to supervise his activities closely, hospitalization was not necessary. All other aspects of the program were continued. 
    B ill’s response to the medication was positive but not dramatic. The most obvious effect was on his self-talk, which was reduced considerably over a 4-week period. Bill attributed this change to the virtual disappearance of the annoying, intrusive thoughts. His delusions remained intact, however, despite the therapist’s attempt to encourage a rational consideration of the evidence. The following example illustrates the impregnable quality of delusional thinking as well as the naiveté of the therapist. 
     One of Bill’s ideas was that his picture had been on the cover of  Time magazine. This seemed like a simple idea to test, and Bill expressed a willingness to try. Together they narrowed the range of dates to the last 8 months. The therapist then asked Bill to visit the public library before their next session and check all issues of  Time during this period. Of course, Bill did not fi nd his picture. Nevertheless, his conviction was even stronger than before. He had convinced himself that the conspirators had seen him on his way to the library, beaten him there, and switched magazine covers before he could discover the original. Undaunted, the therapist recommended two more public libraries for the next week. As might have been expected, Bill did not fi nd his picture at either library but remained convinced that the cover had appeared. Every effort to introduce contradictory evidence was met by this same stubborn resistance. 
    O ver the next several weeks, Bill became somewhat less adamant about his beliefs. He conceded that there was a chance that he had imagined the whole thing. It seemed to him that the plot probably did exist and that the movie was, in all likelihood, still playing around the country, but he was willing to admit that the evidence for this belief was less than overwhelming. Although his suspicions remained, the fear of observation and the threat of death were less immediate, and he was able to concentrate more fully on the other aspects of the treatment program. Hospitalization did not become necessary, and he was able to continue living with Colleen’s family. Despite important improvements, it was clear that Bill would continue to need a special, supportive environment, and it seemed unlikely that he would assume normal occupational and social roles, at least not in the near future. 
 Discussion 

T he diagnostic hallmarks of schizophrenia are hallucinations, delusions, and disturbances in affect and thought.  DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000, p. 312) requires the following to support a diagnosis of schizophrenia:
1. Characteristic symptoms:  Two (or more) of the following, each present for a signifi cant portion of time during a 1-month period (or less if successfully treated):
a. Delusions 
b. Hallucinations 
c. Disorganized speech 
d. Grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior 
e. N egative symptoms, such as affective fl attening, alogia, or avolition N ote: Only one of these symptoms is required if delusions are bizarre, hallucinations consist of a voice keeping up a running commentary on the person’s behavior or thoughts, or two or more voices are conversing with each other. 
2. Social/occupational dysfunction:  For a signifi cant portion of the time since the onset of the disturbance, one or more major areas of functioning, such as work, interpersonal relations, or self-care, are markedly below the level achieved prior to the onset. 
3. Duration:  Continuous signs of the disturbance persist for at least 6 months. This 6-month period must include at least 1 month of symptoms that meet Criterion 1 (active phase symptoms) and may include periods of prodromal or residual symptoms. During these prodromal or residual periods, the signs of the disturbance may be manifested by only negative symptoms, or two or more symptoms listed in Criterion 1 present in an attenuated form (such as odd beliefs, unusual perceptual experiences). 
    B ill clearly fi t the diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia. Prior to the expression of his complex, delusional belief system, he exhibited several of the characteristics of a  prodromal phase.  He had been socially isolated since moving to his sister’s home. Although he did interact with his sister and her family, he made no effort to stay in touch with the few friends he had known in New York City, nor did he attempt to meet new friends in the neighborhood. In fact, he had never been particularly active socially, even during his childhood. His occupational performance had deteriorated long before he was fi red from his job as an elevator operator. Several neighbors had complained about his peculiar behavior. For example, one of Colleen’s friends once called to tell her that she had been watching Bill as he walked home from the grocery store. He was carrying a bag of groceries, clearly mumbling to himself, and moving in a strange pattern. He would take two or three steps forward, then one to the side onto the grass next to the sidewalk. At this point, Bill would hop once on his left foot, take one step forward, and then step back onto the sidewalk and continue the sequence. Thinking that this behavior seemed similar to games that children commonly play, Colleen asked Bill about his walk home. He told her that each of these movements possessed a particular meaning and that he followed this pattern to correct scruples that were being placed in his head as he returned from the store. This explanation, and his other comments about his scruples, would be considered an example of magical thinking. Overall, Bill’s delusional beliefs and auditory hallucinations can be seen as an extension of the deterioration that began much earlier. 
     Schizophrenia is a relatively common disorder, affecting approximately 1 to 2% of the population (Messias, Chen, & Eaton, 2007; Wu, Birnbaum, Hudson, & Kessler, 2006). Although gender differences in prevalence are not large, the disorder may affect more men than women. Onset usually occurs during adolescence or early adulthood, but somewhat later for women than for men. The prognosis is mixed. When Emil Kraepelin fi rst defi ned the disorder (originally known as  dementia praecox ), he emphasized its chronic deteriorating course. Many patients do, in fact, show a gradual decline in social and occupational functioning and continue to exhibit psychotic symptoms either continuously or intermittently throughout their lives. However, a substantial number of patients seem to recover without signs of residual impairment. Much of the most informative data pertaining to prognosis have come from the World Health Organization’s International Study of Schizophrenia (Hopper, Harrison, Janca, & Sartorius, 2007). Compared to people with other mental disorders, such as mood disorders, schizophrenics tended to have a worse outcome 20 years after their initial treatment for the disorder. There was substantial overlap between the groups, however, and considerable variability within the schizophrenic patients. The results of this study and several others indicate that roughly 60% of schizophrenic patients follow a chronic pattern, and approximately 25% recover within several years after the onset of the disorder (Heiden & Häfner, 2000). 
    A lthough people with schizophrenia share some important common characteristics, they are also an extremely heterogeneous group. This feature was emphasized in the title of Eugen Bleuler’s classic monograph,  Dementia Praecox or the Group of Schizophrenias (1911/1950). Kraepelin and Bleuler both outlined subtypes of schizophrenia, including catatonic, paranoid, hebephrenic, and simple types. Each of these subtypes was defi ned in terms of a few characteristic symptoms.  Catatonic patients were identifi ed by their bizarre motor movements and the unusual postures they would assume. Their motor behavior might include either a rigid posture with total immobility or undirected, maniclike excitement.  Paranoid patients were those who expressed delusions of persecution and reference. The primary features of  hebephrenia were taken to be inappropriate affect and fl orid symptomatology (e.g., bizarre delusions and hallucinations). Bill would clearly be included in the paranoid subcategory of schizophrenic disorders. 
     Symptomatically defi ned subgroups possess a certain intuitive appeal, but they have not proved to be particularly useful in other respects (Helmes & Landmark, 2003). One major problem has been a lack of reliability in assigning patients to subcategories. Because of problems in identifying the general category of schizophrenia, it is not surprising that the subtypes present further diffi culties. Inconsistency is another drawback; patients who exhibit a particular set of prominent symptoms at one point in time may exhibit another set of features during a later episode. The symptomatically defi ned subgroups have also not been shown to possess either etiological or predictive validity. For example, a specifi c treatment that is more or less effective with catatonic patients in comparison with hebephrenics has not been found. 
    A nother system for subdividing schizophrenic patients is based on the use of three symptom dimensions: psychotic symptoms, negative symptoms, and disorganization (Andreasen, Arndt, Alliger, Miller, & Flaum, 1995; O’Leary et al., 2000). Psychotic symptoms include hallucinations and delusions. Negative symptoms include blunted or restricted affect, social withdrawal, and poverty of speech. Verbal communication problems, such as disorganized speech and bizarre behavior, are included in the third symptom dimension, which is called disorganization. The distinctions among psychotic, negative, and disorganized symptom dimensions have generated a considerable amount of interest and research. 
 Etiological Considerations 
 Genetic factors are clearly involved in the transmission of schizophrenia (Mitchell & Porteous, 2010). The most persuasive data supporting this conclusion come from twin studies and investigations following various adoption methods. Twin studies depend on the following reasoning: Monozygotic (MZ) twins develop from a single zygote, which separates during an early stage of growth and forms two distinct but genetically identical embryos. In the case of dizygotic (DZ) twins, two separate eggs are fertilized by two sperm cells, and both develop simultaneously. Thus, DZ twins share only, on average, 50% of their genes, the same as siblings who do not share the same prenatal period. Based on the assumption that both forms of twins share similar environments, MZ twins should manifest a higher concordance rate (i.e., more often resemble each other) for traits that are genetically determined. This is, in fact, the pattern that has now been reported for schizophrenia over a large number of studies (Pogue-Geile & Gottesman, 2007). For example, one study conducted in Finland reported a concordance rate of 46% for MZ twins and only 9% among DZ twins (Cannon, Kaprio, Loennqvist, Huttunen, & Koskenvuo, 1998). This substantial difference between MZ and DZ concordance indicates the infl uence of genetic factors. On the other hand, the absence of 100% concordance among the MZ twins also indicates that genetic factors do not account for all of the variance. The development of the disorder must therefore depend on a dynamic interaction between a genetically determined predisposition and various environmental events (Gottesman & Hanson, 2005). 
    W e do not know how genetic factors interact with environmental events to produce schizophrenia. This problem is enormously complex because the environmental events in question might take any of several different forms (Walker, Kestler, Bollini, & Hochman, 2004). Some investigators have focused on factors such as nutritional defi ciencies or viral infections. One hypothesis suggests that prenatal infections increase vulnerability to schizophrenia by disrupting brain development in the fetus (e.g., Brown & Derkits, 2010). Another approach to environmental events and vulnerability to schizophrenia has focused on interpersonal relations within the family. Adverse family circumstances during childhood may increase the probability of subsequently developing schizophrenia among people who are genetically predisposed toward the disorder (Schiffman et al., 2001). 
    I n addition to questions about the causes of the disorder, a considerable amount of research has also stressed the family’s infl uence on the course of the disorder. These studies follow the progress of patients who have already been treated for schizophrenia, and they are concerned with expressed emotion (EE), or the extent to which at least one family member is extremely critical of the patient and his or her behavior. The patients are typically followed for several months after discharge from the hospital, and the outcome variable is the percentage of patients who return to the hospital for further treatment. Relapse rates are much higher for patients who returned to high EE homes (Aguilera, Lopez, Breitborde, Kopelowicz, & Zarate, 2010; Hooley, 2007). 
    T he data regarding EE are consistent with Bill’s experience. Bill remembered that when he and his mother were living together, they made each other anxious. His descriptions of her behavior indicate that her emotional involvement was excessive, given that he was an adult and capable of greater independence; she was always worried about his job, his friends, or what he was doing with his time. Her constant intrusions and coaxing fi nally led him to seek refuge with his sister’s family. 
    T he supportive environment provided by Colleen and her family and their willingness to tolerate many of Bill’s idiosyncrasies were undoubtedly helpful in allowing Bill to remain outside a hospital during his psychotic episodes. 
 Treatment 
T here are several important variables to consider in selecting a treatment for acute schizophrenic disturbance. Antipsychotic drugs have become the principal form of intervention since their introduction in the 1950s (Haddad, Taylor, & Niaz, 2009). A large number of carefully controlled studies have demonstrated that these drugs have a benefi cial effect for many patients with schizophrenia. They lead to an improvement in symptoms during acute psychotic episodes. Antipsychotic medications also reduce the probability of symptom relapse if they are taken on a maintenance basis after the patient has recovered from an episode. Unfortunately, some patients, perhaps as many as 25%, do not respond positively to antipsychotic medication. 
    A ntipsychotic medication seems to have a specifi c effect on many psychotic symptoms, such as hallucinations and disorganized speech. In Bill’s case, medication did have a positive effect. The administration of antipsychotic medication was associated with an improvement in his most dramatic symptoms. 
    D espite these positive effects, several limitations and some problems are also associated with the use of antipsychotic drugs. One problem, which was evident in Bill’s case, is that medication is only a partial solution. After the most dramatic symptoms have improved, most patients continue to suffer from role impairments that are not the direct product of hallucinations and delusions. In short, medication can sometimes relieve perceptual aberrations, but it does not remove defi ciencies in social and occupational skills. 
     Another problem arises with treatment-refractory patients. Approximately 10 to 20% of schizophrenic patients do not benefi t from traditional forms of antipsychotic medication (Kane, 1996). Others who respond initially will relapse repeatedly during maintenance drug treatment. Therefore, pharmaceutical companies continue to develop new forms of medication. Clozapine (Clozaril) and risperidone (Risperdal) are examples of the so-called second generation of antipsychotic drugs. They are also known as  atypical antipsychotic drugs because they produce fewer adverse side effects and seem to have a different pharmacological mode of action than more traditional antipsychotic drugs. Controlled studies of clozapine and risperidone have found signifi cant improvement in approximately 30% of patients who were previously considered “treatment resistant” (Turner & Stewart, 2006). The availability of these new forms of medication offers new hope for many patients and their families. 
     A fi nal problem has been the development of long-term side effects, most notably a serious, involuntary movement disorder known as  tardive dyskinesia . The most obvious signs of tardive dyskinesia include trembling of the extremities, lip smacking, and protrusions of the tongue. These symptoms can be disconcerting to both patients and those with whom they interact. Fortunately, atypical antipsychotic drugs are less likely to lead to the development of motor side effects such as tardive dyskinesia (Kane, 2004). 
    P sychosocial treatment programs are also benefi cial for patients with schizophrenia (Bustillo, Lauriello, Horan, & Keith, 2001). Perhaps most important is the use of family-based programs in conjunction with maintenance medication. Several studies have evaluated treatment programs designed to help patients with families that are rated high in EE (Girón et al., 2010). In addition to antipsychotic medication, treatment typically includes two principal components. First, the therapist provides family members with information about schizophrenia, on the assumption that some hostility and criticism result from failure to understand the nature of the patient’s problems. Second, the therapist focuses on enhancing the family’s ability to cope with stressful experiences by working on problem-solving and communication skills. Results with this type of family intervention have been very encouraging. 
    I n Bill’s case, his sister’s family was not high in EE. Direct treatment focused on family patterns of communication was therefore unnecessary. The therapist did, however, spend time talking with Colleen and Roger about Bill’s situation in an effort to help them cope with his idiosyncratic behavior. Bill’s therapist also directed his attention to the development of social skills. These efforts met with mixed success. Social skills programs are often useful with schizophrenics who are being treated on an outpatient basis (Pilling et al., 2002). 
    T here is also some reason to be cautious about the use of active psychological approaches to the treatment of patients who are socially withdrawn and exhibiting other negative symptoms (e.g., Kopelowicz, Liberman, Mintz, & Zarate, 1997). Programs that increase the level of social interaction among chronic schizophrenic patients may have adverse effects on other areas of the person’s adjustment. Patients with severe, persistent negative symptoms and those who are not on medication may not be able to cope with the increase in stress that is associated with an active, directive form of social intervention. This effect may have been evident in Bill’s case. He was not receiving medication until after the therapist became aware of his extensive delusional system. His response to the behavioral program seemed to be more positive after the introduction of antipsychotic medication. Prior to that point, the role-playing that was attempted during sessions and the homework assignments during the week actually seemed to increase his level of anxiety. 
 Discussion Questions 

1. One simple way to defi ne a delusion is to say that it is false belief. But there is more to it than that. How would you describe Bill’s delusional belief about the fi lm that had presumably been made about him? What characteristics of his belief system were important, beyond the fact that it was not based on evidence that could be shared with other people? 
2. W hat were the earliest symptoms that Bill was beginning to develop a psychotic disorder? Were there any meaningful signs of his disorder prior to the onset of hallucinations and delusions? If medication is effective for most people who have psychotic symptoms, should it also be prescribed 
for people who seem to be vulnerable to schizophrenia? What are the possible advantages and disadvantages of this approach to treatment? How could it be evaluated? 
3. Given the broad range of symptoms and social defi cits that are often associ-ated with schizophrenia, these patients often need a broad array of services and support systems. Other than antipsychotic medication, what are the most important forms of mental-health service that would be helpful, both to the patients and to their families? 
4. W ho should pay for mental-health services to patients with serious mental disorders such as schizophrenia? Should they be included in standard healthinsurance programs? Should they receive a priority that is comparable to other medical disorders, such as cancer and heart disease? 
    